Citation: Gordillo, A.; López-
Fernández, D.; Mayor, J. Examining
and Comparing the Effectiveness of
Virtual Reality Serious Games and
LEGO Serious Play for Learning
Scrum. Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
app14020830
Academic Editors: Calin Gheorghe
Dan Neamtu, Radu Comes, Jing Fang
and Dorin-Mircea Popovici
Received: 20 November 2023
Revised: 15 January 2024
Accepted: 17 January 2024
Published: 18 January 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
applied  
sciences 
Article
Examining and Comparing the Effectiveness of Virtual Reality
Serious Games and LEGO Serious Play for Learning Scrum
Aldo Gordillo *
 , Daniel L ópez-Fern ández
 and Jes ús Mayor
Computer Science Department, Universidad Polit écnica de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain;
daniel.lopez@upm.es (D.L.-F.); jesus.mayor@upm.es (J.M.)
*Correspondence: a.gordillo@upm.es
Abstract: Significant research work has been undertaken related to the game-based learning approach
over the last years. However, a closer look at this work reveals that further research is needed to
examine some types of game-based learning approaches such as virtual reality serious games and
LEGO Serious Play. This article examines and compares the effectiveness for learning Scrum and
related agile practices of a serious game based on virtual reality and a learning activity based on
the LEGO Serious Play methodology. The presented study used a quasi-experimental design with
two groups, pre- and post-tests, and a perceptions questionnaire. The sample was composed of
59 software engineering students, 22 of which belonged to group A, while the other 37 were part
of group B. The students in group A played the virtual reality serious game, whereas the students
in group B conducted the LEGO Serious Play activity. The results show that both game-based
learning approaches were effective for learning Scrum and related agile practices in terms of learning
performance and motivation, but they also show that the students who played the virtual reality
serious game outperformed their peers from the other group in terms of learning performance.
Keywords: game-based learning; virtual reality; educational games; serious games; technology-
enhanced learning; LEGO Serious Play; Scrum; agile methodologies
1. Introduction
A considerable effort has been and continues to be devoted to search for new alter-
natives to improve and complement traditional learning methodologies. In recent years,
game-based learning has become one of the most promising learning approaches due
to its potential to increase not only students’ motivation but also students’ learning. As
evidenced by several recent literature reviews [ 1–7], a plethora of studies reported suc-
cessful game-based learning experiences. This evidence allows the conclusion that, when
game-based learning is suitably applied, it can lead to enhancements in both students’
motivation and learning outcomes.
However, although a lot of research work has been conducted in the game-based
learning field, a closer look at this work reveals that not all types of game-based learning
approaches have been extensively investigated. For example, despite there being plenty
of studies examining the educational use of videogames [ 1–7], much less research has
been conducted to examine the use of educational videogames based on virtual reality or
game-based learning activities based on LEGO Serious Play.
This article examines and compares the instructional effectiveness of a virtual reality
serious game and a learning activity based on the LEGO Serious Play methodology. In
particular, the study reported in this article examined and compared the use of the two
approaches for learning the Scrum framework and some agile practices commonly adopted
by Scrum teams. In this regard, it should be noted that, nowadays, Scrum is by far the
most widely employed agile methodology in the industry [ 8] and is part of many degree
programs, especially in software engineering. The research questions addressed by this
article are as follows:
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830. https://doi.org/10.3390/app14020830 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 2 of 15
• RQ1: Are virtual reality serious games effective in terms of knowledge acquisition and
motivation for learning Scrum?
• RQ2: Are activities based on LEGO Serious Play effective in terms of knowledge
acquisition and motivation for learning Scrum?
• RQ3: Are virtual reality serious games more effective than activities based on LEGO
Serious Play in terms of knowledge acquisition and motivation for learning Scrum?
The article is organized into six sections. The next section reviews the existing literature
on virtual reality serious games, LEGO Serious Play, and Scrum training. Section 3 details
the research methodology, including a description of the virtual reality serious game and the
LEGO Serious Play activity that were employed. The results are presented and discussed
in Sections 4 and 5, respectively. Finally, Section 6 outlines the conclusions of the article
and suggests future works that could be undertaken.
2. Related Work
2.1. Serious Games Based on Virtual Reality
As evidenced by recent literature reviews, virtual reality is being widely used for
educational purposes in many knowledge fields and industrial sectors because this technol-
ogy contributes to improve knowledge acquisition and skills development, engages and
motivates learners, and enhances the whole learning experience [9–11].
Some works have reported the use of virtual reality serious games by practitioners
in professional contexts, including games to simulate medical operations [ 12], operate
control panels in power plants [ 13], and conduct psychological exposure therapies [ 14].
Furthermore, some works have reported the use of this kind of game in educational settings,
including games for learning languages and culture [ 15], physics [ 16], engineering [ 17],
and topics related to computer science such as computer programming [ 18]. In this regard,
it should be pointed out that the authors of the present contribution recently presented
ScrumVR [19–21], which is the virtual reality serious game examined in this article.
In addition to ScrumVR, other virtual reality serious games aimed to teach the Scrum
framework have been reported in the literature [ 22–24]. In the game presented by Caserman
et al. [ 22], the player controls a Scrum Master that must guide their team throughout a
Sprint. Radhakrishnan and Koumaditis [ 23] proposed the creation of a multiplayer virtual
reality environment for simulating Sprints. However, a full implementation or validation
of this system was not reported in that work. In a more recent work, Visescu et al. [ 24]
presented ScrumSim, a multiplayer simulation in which players, with the assistance of
two avatars who play the roles of the Scrum Master and the Product Owner, interact with
a virtual reality environment, perform tasks, and receive feedback on their performance.
Although ScrumSim has been used in real-world settings, a formal evaluation has not yet
been reported.
2.2. LEGO Serious Play
LEGO Serious Play [ 25] is a learning methodology initially designed to teach pro-
fessionals in a playful and active way soft skills such as leadership, communication, and
conflict resolution. However, in the last decades this methodology has evolved substan-
tially [ 26] and it is being applied in higher education across many knowledge fields. Indeed,
LEGO Serious Play activities have been used in fields as diverse as marketing [ 27], arts [ 28],
industrial engineering [ 29], and systems engineering [ 30]. These contributions indicate
that LEGO Serious Play can be used not only to learn soft skills, but also to learn specific
competences in many fields of knowledge, including software engineering.
Several LEGO Serious Play activities have been designed to teach concepts related
to software engineering. A very prolific author in this area is Kurkovsky [ 31–35], whose
works present activities to teach requirements engineering [ 31,32], complex systems de-
pendability [ 31], component integration, and software interface design [ 33], Test-Driven
Development (TDD) [ 34], and Scrum [ 35]. The conclusion of these contributions is that this
learning methodology is useful to learn specific competences about software engineering,
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 3 of 15
develop soft skills, and improve students’ motivation. In the same vein, some authors
of the present contribution reported in [ 36] another LEGO Serious play which proved to
be highly appealing and motivating from the students’ perspective and effective to learn
about software life-cycle models and software development activities.
Another remarkable LEGO Serious play activity in the software engineering field
is LEGO City, which was conceived by Krivitsky [ 37] and serves to teach the Scrum
framework. In his book [ 37], this author presents guidelines to conduct the activity as well
as empirical experiences reporting positive outcomes. Beyond the experiences described
by Krivitsky himself, this activity has been adapted and replicated by other researchers
in professionals and higher education contexts. For example, ref. [ 38] used the LEGO
City activity with professionals of Croatian IT companies, ref. [ 39] with students of a
computer science degree delivered by the University of Pernambuco (Brazil), and ref. [ 40]
with students of a software project management master degree delivered by the Aalto
University (Finland). In every case, the authors found out that the LEGO City activity
was very well appreciated by the participants and highly effective to learn about Scrum.
Another interesting experience is the one reported by [ 41], who adapted the LEGO City
activity to be performed remotely using online whiteboards and real-time communication
tools. Similarly, ref. [ 42] adapted a LEGO Serious Play activity aimed at teaching Scrum to
be used with Minetest, an open-source variant of the Minecraft game.
2.3. Scrum Training
As described in the previous subsections, virtual reality serious games [ 19–24] and
LEGO Serious Play activities [ 35,37–42] have been used to deliver Scrum training. More-
over, other noteworthy alternatives have been used for this purpose, including serious
video games not based on virtual reality [ 43–45], physical games [ 46–48], agile project
management tools [49], and classroom exercises [50].
Scrum-X [ 43] is a game developed in Microsoft Excel 365 with VBA programming
designed to teach Scrum to graduates and professionals in which players can manage
software projects. Another serious video game for learning Scrum is Virtual Scrum [ 45]. In
this game, players can explore and interact with a virtual world that simulates the room
of a Scrum team. In [ 44], an online Scrum simulation conducted by using the multiplayer
video game “Don’t Starve Together”, Trello, and Discord is presented. In addition to video
games, some physical games aimed at teaching Scrum have been designed such as the card
games PlayScrum [ 46] and “Don’t Break the Build” [ 47]. Another physical game to teach
Scrum was proposed by [ 48]. In this game, players organized in groups must build paper
boats, hats, and planes following the Scrum framework.
Another approach that has been adopted for Scrum training is the planning and
monitoring of software projects through agile project management tools such as Taiga [ 49].
Lastly, it is also worth mentioning that some classroom exercises have been proposed for
introducing Scrum. For example, ref. [ 50] proposed “Play Ball”, an exercise targeted to
undergraduates that only requires 20–30 hand-size balls per team and that aims to introduce
students to basic Scrum concepts and allow them to practice self-organization.
3. Research Methodology
The study presented in this article used a quasi-experimental design with two groups
(A and B), pre- and post-tests, and a perceptions questionnaire. The goal of the study was
to empirically examine and compare the effectiveness in terms of knowledge acquisition
and motivation of two game-based interventions for learning Scrum and related agile
practices: one in which participants played a virtual reality serious game and another based
on LEGO Serious Play in which participants built a part of a city by using LEGO blocks.
The students in group A played the virtual reality serious game, whereas the students in
group B conducted the LEGO Serious Play activity.
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 4 of 15
3.1. Sample
This study involved the participation of 59 students in total. Group A was comprised
of 22 students with a median age of 22.3 (SD = 2.3): 15 males, 5 females, and 2 students
who preferred not to indicate their gender. Group B was comprised of 37 students with
a median age of 22.5 (SD = 4.8): 32 males and 5 females. All students who participated
in this study were enrolled in a project management course at Universidad Polit écnica
de Madrid. This project management course is worth 6 ECTS (European Credit Transfer
System) credits (so it requires 150–180 h of student work) and all students in their fourth
year of the Bachelor’s Degree in software engineering are required to take it. The course
covers the fundamentals and common practices of project management and introduces
software project management using traditional and agile approaches.
3.2. Procedure
First, all participating students gave informed consent to participate in the study.
Then, these students were split into two groups. Random assignment was not possible
because some of the students had already played the serious game the previous academic
year in a different course. Therefore, the students who had never played the serious game
were assigned to group A and the remaining students were assigned to group B. Once the
groups were established, all the participating students were given 10 min for completing
a pre-test. Once this test was completed, students in group A played the virtual reality
serious game over 40–45 min after spending 15 min attending to the teachers’ instructions
and setting up their devices; whereas students in group B conducted the LEGO Serious
Play activity, which lasted around one hour. Then, all students were given 10 min for
completing the post-test. Finally, students completed the perceptions questionnaire. The
whole intervention, including the tests and the questionnaire, lasted around one hour and
a half in both groups. All participating students completed both the pre- and post-test, as
well as the perceptions questionnaire.
3.3. Methods and Instruments
The pre-test consisted of 10 theoretical questions encompassing the Scrum framework
and related agile practices, including user stories, MoSCoW, story points, and Planning
Poker. The questions were aligned with the official Scrum Guide 2020 [ 51] and the resources
provided by the Agile Alliance [ 52]. Each question had four options, only one of which
was correct. Correct answers were worth +1 point each, whereas incorrect answers were
worth −0.33 points each. Thus, the pre-test was scored from 0 to 10. The post-test was
composed by the same 10 questions included in the pre-test and was scored in the same
way as this test. In this regard, it should be clarified that, with the aim of preventing
students from memorizing answers, correct answers and additional feedback were only
revealed to the students after the time to complete the post-test had expired. Moreover, in
order to discourage copying and other unexpected misconduct, the students’ final course
grade remained unaffected by either their post-test scores or their pre-test scores.
The questionnaire distributed to all participants at the end of the intervention to collect
their perceptions was developed ad hoc for this study. This questionnaire was comprised of
two demographic questions (age and gender), a set of statements to be rated on a Likert scale
ranging from one (strongly disagree) to five (strongly agree), and an open-ended question
that allowed respondents to provide comments. The Likert items of the questionnaire are
included in Section 4 together with the results. The questionnaire distributed to both groups
was identical, except for item 18, which was exclusively included in the questionnaire given
to the students in group A. This particular item aimed to inquire whether these students
had experienced any dizziness while using the virtual reality serious game.
3.4. Materials: Virtual Reality Serious Game
The virtual reality serious game examined in this article is called ScrumVR and aims
to instruct the player in the Scrum framework and some related agile practices in an
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 5 of 15
immersive and effective way. ScrumVR is a first-person game in which the main character
is a developer who starts to work in a software company that joins a Scrum team. During
the game, the player receives explanations, interacts with other members of the Scrum
team, engages actively in the Scrum events, contributes to the development of Scrum
artifacts, and employs diverse agile techniques, including MoSCoW and Planning Poker.
Screenshots of certain key events taking place throughout the game are shown in Figure 1.
Appl. Sci.  2024 , 14, 830 5 of 15 
 
 whether these students had experienced any di zziness while using the virtual reality se-
rious game. 
3.4. Materials: Virtual Reality Serious Game 
The virtual reality serious game examined in  this article is called ScrumVR and aims 
to instruct the player in the Scrum framework and some related agile practices in an im-
mersive and e ﬀective way. ScrumVR is a ﬁrst-person game in which the main character is 
a developer who starts to work in a softwa re company that joins a Scrum team. During 
the game, the player receives explanations, interacts with other members of the Scrum 
team, engages actively in the Scrum events, contributes to the development of Scrum ar-
tifacts, and employs diverse agile techniques, including MoSCoW and Planning Poker. 
Screenshots of certain key events taking plac e throughout the game are shown in Figure 
1. 
 
Figure 1. (A) The Scrum Master explains the foun dation of agile methodologies. ( B) The player 
chooses a user story. ( C) The player talks with the Product Owner. ( D) The player selects a card 
during a Planning Poker. 
From a didactic standpoint, the game is narr ated linearly, and it is divided into four 
chapters of approximately the same duration. Completing the four chapters requires the 
player to spend around 40–45 min. Each chapter is aimed at achieving certain learning 
objectives in such a way that the player le arns how the Scrum framework works. Table 1 
presents a summary of the main topics covered by each chapter of ScrumVR. 
Table 1. Main topics covered by ScrumVR. 
Chapter Topics 
1: Introduction Agile and Scrum foundation. 
The role of the Scrum Master. 
How to operate a Kanban board. 
2: Daily Scrum Performance of a Daily Meeting in Scrum. 
How to select user stories based on their priority and size estima-
tion. How to interpret a burndown chart. 
3: Sprint Review  
and Sprint  Retrospective The role of the Product Owner. 
Performance of a Sprint Review. Performance of a Sprint Retrospective. 
Figure 1. (A) The Scrum Master explains the foundation of agile methodologies. ( B) The player
chooses a user story. ( C) The player talks with the Product Owner. ( D) The player selects a card
during a Planning Poker.
From a didactic standpoint, the game is narrated linearly, and it is divided into four
chapters of approximately the same duration. Completing the four chapters requires the
player to spend around 40–45 min. Each chapter is aimed at achieving certain learning
objectives in such a way that the player learns how the Scrum framework works. Table 1
presents a summary of the main topics covered by each chapter of ScrumVR.
Table 1. Main topics covered by ScrumVR.
Chapter Topics
1: IntroductionAgile and Scrum foundation.
The role of the Scrum Master.
How to operate a Kanban board.
2: Daily ScrumPerformance of a Daily Meeting in Scrum.
How to select user stories based on their priority and size estimation.
How to interpret a burndown chart.
3: Sprint Review
and Sprint
RetrospectiveThe role of the Product Owner.
Performance of a Sprint Review.
Performance of a Sprint Retrospective.
How to analyze the Sprint performance using a burndown chart.
4: Sprint PlanningPerformance of a Sprint Planning.
How to define user stories.
How to prioritize user stories using MoSCoW.
How to estimate the size of user stories using Planning Poker and story points.
Regarding its technical characteristics, ScrumVR was developed using the Unity game
engine and was conceived to be played by using Android devices equipped with a simple
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 6 of 15
cardboard. One of the most remarkable points in the development of this educational
application is the selected locomotion method. Since ScrumVR was designed for mobile
devices, where positional tracking is not available, it was decided to use the on-rails guided
locomotion method [ 53] in order to fully guide the player’s movement and minimize the
cybersickness feeling. Therefore, the players can look in all directions by rotating the head
but do not have the freedom to move wherever they want, thus avoiding distractions and,
consequently, facilitating the achievement of the established learning objectives. Addition-
ally, positional sound [ 54] was used to guide the players to look in the most convenient
direction throughout the experience. Another technical feature that was used for guiding
the attention of the players was the use of illumination [55].
Another key technical feature of ScrumVR is the use of diegetic menus to allow the
player to select an element by looking at it for a certain period of time. Whenever the
player can perform an action in the game, a reticle that can be moved by rotating the
head is displayed on the screen. When the reticle is placed over a selectable element, it
starts to visually indicate the waiting time required to select that element. The diegetic
menus used by ScrumVR allow the player to make decisions (see Figure 1C) and engage
in agile techniques with other characters by playing mini-games (see Figure 1B,D). These
mini-games were developed using a finite state machine model where all possible answers
have an associated narrative feedback. Thereby, the learning experience is enriched with
feedback generated according to the player’s actions. More technical details about ScrumVR
can be found at [19,20].
3.5. Materials: LEGO Serious Play Activity
The LEGO Serious Play activity assessed in this article aims to teach in an active and
engaging way the Scrum framework and some related agile practices, including MoSCoW
and Planning Poker. This activity was designed based on the LEGO City activity, which
was initially conceived by Krivitsky [37] as explained in the related work section.
In the LEGO Serious Play activity, students work in teams of 4–6 members and each
team assumes the role of a Scrum team belonging to a certain organization and working
on a project whose goal is to build a part of a city (e.g., a neighborhood, a zoo, or a motor
vehicle fleet). One student of each team assumes the role of the Product Owner, another
student of the team assumes the role of the Scrum Master, and the remaining students of
the team assume the role of the developers.
Each part of the city consists of a set of LEGO constructions. Therefore, each Scrum
team has to build a part of a city by using the Scrum framework as methodology and
LEGO pieces as materials. At the beginning of the activity, the Product Owner of each
team is provided with a set of user story cards. Each of these cards includes a user story
that describes a LEGO construction following the classic role–feature–benefit pattern, as
well as two empty boxes in order to allow students to write the priority and estimated
size of the user story (see Figure 2). During the activity, the LEGO constructions should
be built by the developers (and only by the developers) using LEGO pieces according to
their corresponding user stories and the LEGO construction manuals (see Figure 3). These
manuals can also be used by the developers in order to estimate the size of the user stories.
The LEGO Serious Play activity consisted of the following phases:
1. Preparation. Students were divided into teams of 4–6 people and each team appointed
a Product Owner and a Scrum Master. Then, each team received a starting pack
comprised of the following elements: three instruction manuals (one for the Product
Owner, one for the Scrum Master, and one for the developers), a LEGO box with
pieces and construction manuals, a set of user story cards, and a kit of Planning Poker
cards (see Figure 4). After that, each student read the instructions corresponding to
his/her role (Product Owner, Scrum Master, or developer).
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 7 of 15
Appl. Sci.  2024 , 14, 830 7 of 15 
 
  
Figure 2. Example of a user story card. 
 
Figure 3. Example of a LEGO construction. 
The LEGO Serious Play activity consisted of the following phases: 
1. Preparation. Students were divided into teams of 4–6 people and each team ap-
pointed a Product Owner and a Scrum Master. Then, each team received a starting 
pack comprised of the following elements: three instruction manuals (one for the 
Product Owner, one for the Scrum Master, and one for the developers), a LEGO box 
with pieces and construction manuals, a set of user story cards, and a kit of Planning 
Poker cards (see Figure 4). After that, each student read the instructions correspond-ing to his/her role (Product Owner, Scrum Master, or developer). 
Figure 2. Example of a user story card.
Appl. Sci.  2024 , 14, 830 7 of 15 
 
  
Figure 2. Example of a user story card. 
 
Figure 3. Example of a LEGO construction. 
The LEGO Serious Play activity consisted of the following phases: 
1. Preparation. Students were divided into teams of 4–6 people and each team ap-
pointed a Product Owner and a Scrum Master. Then, each team received a starting 
pack comprised of the following elements: three instruction manuals (one for the 
Product Owner, one for the Scrum Master, and one for the developers), a LEGO box 
with pieces and construction manuals, a set of user story cards, and a kit of Planning 
Poker cards (see Figure 4). After that, each student read the instructions correspond-ing to his/her role (Product Owner, Scrum Master, or developer). 
Figure 3. Example of a LEGO construction.
Appl. Sci.  2024 , 14, 830 8 of 15 
 
  
Figure 4. LEGO Serious Play activity starting pack. 
2. Product backlog prioritization. The Product Owner prioritized the user stories using 
the MoSCoW technique. The Scrum Master was allowed to help the Product Owner 
in applying this prioritization technique. Meanwhile, students playing the role of de-
velopers continued to familiarize themselves with its instructions. 
3. Sprint planning. The Product Owner explain ed the client needs to the rest of the 
Scrum team and then all students de ﬁned a goal for the current Sprint. Then, the 
developers selected user stories to be includ ed in the current Sprint in a consensual 
manner with the Product Owner. During this process, the size of the selected user 
stories was estimated by the developers us ing story points and Planning Poker.  
4. Sprint execution. Once the Sprint planning event was over, students were given a 
total of 20 min for this phase. Each team  had to hold two Daily Scrums during the 
Sprint: one at the beginning of this phase and another one 10 min later. During the 
Sprint, the students assuming the role of developers worked on building LEGO con-
structions in order to complete user stories, whereas the Product Owner was in 
charge of validating these constructions (i .e., the increments). The Scrum Master was 
accountable for the Scrum framework being adopted correctly, that is, as de ﬁned in 
the Scrum Guide. 
5. Sprint review. The students held a Sprint review at the end of the Sprint, in which 
they presented the results of the Sprint (i .e., the LEGO constructions that were com-
pletely built during it) to the teachers, who ac ted as clients in this event. Furthermore, 
students discussed about what to do on the next Sprints. 
6. Sprint Retrospective. After the Sprint review , students held a Sprint retrospective, in 
which they discussed what went well during the Sprint, what problems arose, and how these problems were or were not solved. Moreover, students re ﬂected on their 
performance during the Sprint by using a burndown chart and identi ﬁed at least one 
improvement for the next Sprint. 
3.6. Data Analysis 
The learning performance was determined as the di ﬀerence between post-test and 
pre-test scores. A Shapiro–Wilk test of norm ality determined that not all collected data 
were normally distributed and hence non-parametric methods were employed. Within 
each group, the Wilcoxon signed-ranks test for paired samples was utilized to compare the post-test and pre-test scores, while the Mann–Whitney U test was employed to con-
duct comparisons between groups. In all comparisons, the correlation coe ﬃcient r was 
Figure 4. LEGO Serious Play activity starting pack.
2. Product backlog prioritization. The Product Owner prioritized the user stories using
the MoSCoW technique. The Scrum Master was allowed to help the Product Owner
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 8 of 15
in applying this prioritization technique. Meanwhile, students playing the role of
developers continued to familiarize themselves with its instructions.
3. Sprint planning. The Product Owner explained the client needs to the rest of the
Scrum team and then all students defined a goal for the current Sprint. Then, the
developers selected user stories to be included in the current Sprint in a consensual
manner with the Product Owner. During this process, the size of the selected user
stories was estimated by the developers using story points and Planning Poker.
4. Sprint execution. Once the Sprint planning event was over, students were given a total
of 20 min for this phase. Each team had to hold two Daily Scrums during the Sprint:
one at the beginning of this phase and another one 10 min later. During the Sprint, the
students assuming the role of developers worked on building LEGO constructions in
order to complete user stories, whereas the Product Owner was in charge of validating
these constructions (i.e., the increments). The Scrum Master was accountable for the
Scrum framework being adopted correctly, that is, as defined in the Scrum Guide.
5. Sprint review. The students held a Sprint review at the end of the Sprint, in which they
presented the results of the Sprint (i.e., the LEGO constructions that were completely
built during it) to the teachers, who acted as clients in this event. Furthermore,
students discussed about what to do on the next Sprints.
6. Sprint Retrospective. After the Sprint review, students held a Sprint retrospective, in
which they discussed what went well during the Sprint, what problems arose, and
how these problems were or were not solved. Moreover, students reflected on their
performance during the Sprint by using a burndown chart and identified at least one
improvement for the next Sprint.
3.6. Data Analysis
The learning performance was determined as the difference between post-test and
pre-test scores. A Shapiro–Wilk test of normality determined that not all collected data
were normally distributed and hence non-parametric methods were employed. Within
each group, the Wilcoxon signed-ranks test for paired samples was utilized to compare the
post-test and pre-test scores, while the Mann–Whitney U test was employed to conduct
comparisons between groups. In all comparisons, the correlation coefficient r was employed
as the measure of effect size. Following Cohen’s guidelines [ 56], an r value between 0.1
and 0.3 indicates a small effect size, between 0.3 and 0.5 it indicates a medium effect
size, while an r value of 0.5 or greater signifies a large effect size. Finally, the mean (M)
and the standard deviation (SD) were employed to analyze the results of the perceptions
questionnaire. Moreover, the Spearman correlation analysis was performed to explore the
relationships among the items of the perceptions questionnaire. The data collected and
analyzed in this study are provided in the Supplementary Materials.
4. Results
4.1. Learning Performance
Table 2 shows the pre- and post-test scores achieved by the students in group A (who
played the virtual reality game) and group B (who played the LEGO Serious Play activity).
The learning performance, determined by the difference between post-test scores and
pre-test scores, exhibited statistical significance in both groups. Its effect size was large
(r = 0.59) in group A and medium (r = 0.35) in group B. These figures indicate that the two
game-based learning approaches were effective in terms of knowledge acquisition.
When pre-test scores between groups were compared, a statistically significant dif-
ference with a medium effect size ( p-value = 0.01; r = 0.35) was found in favor of group
B. On the contrary, the difference between post-test scores obtained by both groups was
non-statistically significant and had a less than small effect size ( p-value = 0.50; r = 0.09).
These results indicate that students in group A had less prior knowledge on Scrum and agile
practices than their counterparts in group B but that, after the intervention, all students had
similar knowledge on this matter regardless of their group. The comparison of learning
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 9 of 15
performance between groups shows that there is a statistically significant difference with a
medium effect size ( p-value = 0.02, r = 0.30) in favor of group A. In view of this fact, it can
be concluded that the serious game based on virtual reality used by the students in group
A was more effective in terms of knowledge acquisition than the activity based on LEGO
Serious Play conducted by the students in group B.
Table 2. Pre- and post-test scores.
GroupPre-Test Post-TestLearning
PerformanceWilcoxon Signed-Ranks
Test for Paired Samples
M SD M SD M SD p-Value Effect Size (r)
A (N = 22) 3.9 1.8 7.3 1.3 3.5 2.3 <0.01 0.59
B (N = 37) 5.3 2.5 6.8 2.2 1.5 2.6 <0.01 0.35
4.2. Students Perceptions
On the one hand, Table 3 shows the Likert items of the questionnaire that were used
to collect the students’ perceptions toward the game-based learning interventions. On the
other hand, Table 4 shows the results of the questionnaire for both groups, including the
rating difference between groups for each item.
Table 3. Likert items of the questionnaire.
Item
1 My overall opinion of the activity is positive.
2 The activity helped me learn.
3 The activity was appealing and motivating.
4 The activity made learning fun.
5 The activity was immersive.
6 The activity was easy to complete.
7 I needed help to complete the activity.
8 The activity was well organized.
9 The activity is useful to learn about Scrum.
10 The activity is useful to learn about the roles defined by Scrum.
11 The activity is useful to learn about the events defined by Scrum.
12 The activity is useful to learn about the artifacts defined by Scrum.
13 The activity is useful to learn about the Planning Poker technique.
14 The activity is useful for learning about the MoSCoW technique.
15In the future, I would like to conduct activities similar to the one I have
conducted in other courses.
16I prefer learning through activities such as the one I conducted for learning
through traditional teaching methodologies.
17 The activity is a good complement to traditional teaching methodologies.
18 * I did not experience any dizziness during the activity.
* Item 18 was included only for group A.
Overall, the students in both groups had a very positive opinion of the game-based
learning activity that was performed in its group and found it beneficial for their learning,
as well as motivating, fun, immersive, and well organized. Moreover, in both groups, most
students thought the activity was easy to complete and stated that they did not need help
to do so. Regarding self-perceived learning effectiveness, in both groups a vast majority
of students considered the activity to be useful for learning about Scrum in general and,
specifically, for learning about the roles, events, and artifacts defined by Scrum, as well
as about two agile practices often used by Scrum teams: MoSCoW, and Planning Poker.
Finally, students in both groups were generally in favor of using similar activities in future
courses, either as a substitute for traditional teaching or as a complement to it.
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 10 of 15
Table 4. Results of the questionnaire.
ItemA Group B Group Mann–Whitney U Test
M SD M SD p-Value Effect Size (r)
1 4.6 0.8 4.8 0.6 0.42 0.10
2 4.6 0.6 4.6 0.7 0.87 0.02
3 4.4 0.9 4.7 0.5 0.25 0.15
4 4.5 0.8 4.7 0.7 0.27 0.14
5 4.4 0.9 4.7 0.6 0.20 0.17
6 4.7 0.5 4.4 0.7 0.07 0.24
7 1.5 1.2 2.2 1.1 <0.01 0.45
8 4.8 0.4 4.5 0.6 0.07 0.23
9 4.7 0.5 4.6 0.7 0.34 0.12
10 4.5 0.8 4.6 0.5 0.74 0.04
11 4.8 0.4 4.6 0.6 0.47 0.09
12 4.4 0.8 4.4 0.8 0.87 0.02
13 4.9 0.3 4.7 0.6 0.30 0.13
14 4.7 0.4 4.3 1.0 0.15 0.19
15 4.7 0.6 4.7 0.6 0.97 0.00
16 3.8 1.3 4.4 1.1 0.09 0.22
17 4.7 0.5 4.8 0.5 0.54 0.08
18 3.5 1.5 - - - -
With respect to the question about dizziness, included only in the questionnaire
administered to the students in group A, 7 out of 22 (32%) students reported experiencing
some kind of dizziness while using the virtual reality serious game. In this regard, it should
be indicated that all participating students were able to complete the activity without
major issues. Furthermore, the Spearman correlation analysis was run and no statistically
significant correlations were found between dizziness and the intention to use similar
virtual reality games in the future or any other item of the perceptions questionnaire.
The average ratings given by the students in both groups were very similar for most
questionnaire items. In fact, the effect size of the difference between group ratings was
found to be less than small and non-statistically significant at the 0.05 level for all items
except for items 6, 7, 8, and 16. For the items 6, 8, and 16 the effect size was small and
non-statistically significant. The item 7 (needed help) was the only one for which the
difference was found to be statistically significant at the 0.05 level. The effect size of this
difference was found to be medium to large (r = 0.45) and indicates that, although in
general terms students in both groups agreed that they did not need help to complete the
activity, the students in group A agreed more strongly on this statement in comparison
with their counterparts. In general, the comments provided by the participating students
through the administered questionnaire were in line with the outcomes of the Likert items
in both groups. Several students expressed in their comments the innovative nature of both
activities and expressed gratitude to the course instructors for organizing them. In group
A, some students explained that they felt some dizziness and eyestrain during the use of
the virtual reality serious game. In group B, students suggested to increase the time of the
activity and to incorporate more Sprints.
5. Discussion
The results of this article show that the two game-based learning interventions exam-
ined were effective in terms of both knowledge acquisition and motivation. These results
are consistent with the current body of research on game-based learning [ 1–7], which
suggests that this methodology is capable of producing positive impacts on student perfor-
mance and motivation. More specifically, the results obtained for the virtual reality serious
game are consistent with those of previous assessments of this game [ 19–21]. Regarding
the results obtained for the LEGO Serious Play activity, it is worth remarking that they are
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 11 of 15
aligned with those of [ 37–40], who also examined the use of a LEGO Serious Play activity
for learning Scrum and found that it was beneficial for the students’ learning.
Although student perceptions were very similar for the two interventions, students in
group A (who played the virtual reality serious game) outperformed their counterparts in
group B (who conducted the LEGO Serious Play activity) in terms of knowledge acquisition.
In this regard, it is worth pointing out that the students in group A had less prior knowledge
on Scrum and agile practices than those in group B. A possible explanation for this fact
is that students in group B had played the virtual reality serious game in the previous
academic year in a different course so they received extra training on Scrum and agile
practices compared to their peers. The results also show that, in spite of this difference in
prior knowledge on Scrum and related agile practices, students in both groups had similar
knowledge on this matter after the intervention.
Regarding students’ perceptions, it should be remarked that most students found
both game-based learning interventions motivating, fun, immersive, easy to complete, and
adequately organized, as well as beneficial for their learning. In regard to this latter finding,
it is worth pointing out that the students’ reports of self-perceived learning effectiveness
were aligned with the results of the pre- and post-tests and clearly evidence that both
interventions were useful for learning about the core concepts of Scrum including its roles,
events, and artifacts, as well as for learning about agile practices frequently used by Scrum
teams such as MoSCoW and Planning Poker.
Another interesting finding of this article is that the participating students were
generally in favor of conducting similar game-based learning activities in future courses,
either as a complement to traditional teaching or as a substitute of traditional teaching. In
this regard, it should be noted that the use of such activities as a complement to traditional
learning methodologies seems to have greater acceptance among students using them
as a replacement. The students who conducted the LEGO Serious Play activity agreed
more strongly on these statements than their counterparts, which is a noteworthy but not
statistically significant difference between groups. A reasonable explanation for this fact
could have been that a significant percentage (32%) of the students who played the virtual
reality serious game reported experiencing some kind of dizziness during the intervention.
However, all participating students were able to complete the activity without major issues
and no statistically significant correlation was found between dizziness and the intention
to use similar virtual reality games in the future or any other item of the perceptions
questionnaire. Therefore, it can be concluded that students’ perceptions toward the virtual
reality serious game were not affected by dizziness and that dizziness was not severe in
any case.
The only statistically significant difference between groups in terms of student per-
ceptions was that the students who played the virtual reality serious game reported that
they did not need help to a greater extent than their counterparts. This is an expected
finding, since the serious game is a resource that was designed for self-learning whereas the
LEGO Serious Play activity was designed to be conducted in class under the supervision of
the teaching staff. Notwithstanding, according to the results of the student questionnaire,
most students who participated in the LEGO Serious Play activity did not need help. This
finding suggests that the provided instructions, although having room for improvement,
were found suitable in most cases.
6. Conclusions
This article empirically examined and compared the effectiveness for learning Scrum
and related agile practices of a serious game based on virtual reality and a learning activity
based on the LEGO Serious Play methodology by means of a quasi-experiment with two
groups, pre- and post-tests, and a perceptions questionnaire. The reported results show
that both game-based learning approaches were effective in terms of knowledge acquisition
and motivation, as well as showing that the students who played the virtual reality serious
game outperformed their peers, who conducted a LEGO Serious Play activity, in terms
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 12 of 15
of knowledge acquisition. Therefore, the results of the article suggest that game-based
learning using virtual reality serious games or LEGO Serious Play is a suitable option for
educators who are willing to teach in an innovative and playful way agile methodologies
such as Scrum.
Although previous works examined the use of virtual reality serious games for learn-
ing Scrum [ 19–24], as well as the use of LEGO Serious Play for this same purpose [ 35,37–42],
to the knowledge of the authors this is the first work that performed a comparison between
these two game-based learning approaches. Therefore, this article makes a novel contri-
bution by providing, for the first time, evidence on the learning effectiveness of virtual
reality serious games compared to LEGO Serious Play. Furthermore, the results reported in
this article contribute to a better understanding of the benefits and drawbacks of these two
game-based learning approaches.
It should be taken into account that, in spite of providing solid evidence of the effec-
tiveness of virtual reality serious games and LEGO Serious Play, the study presented in
this article has some important limitations. First, no random sampling was used because
students had to be divided based on whether or not they had played the virtual reality
serious game in the past. Second, the study was focused on the evaluation of a single
virtual reality serious game and a single LEGO Serious Play activity and the sample size
was small (22 for group A and 37 for group B), so the conclusions should be treated with
caution. Third, the study examined the learning effectiveness in the short term, but not
in the long term. Another noteworthy limitation is that certain aspects of the game-based
learning experiences such as enjoyment, motivation, and immersion could have been ex-
plored in more detail by extending the perceptions questionnaire to cover additional criteria
(e.g., [ 57]) and by using other evaluations instruments such as the GAMEX scale [ 58], the
Game Engagement Questionnaire [ 59], the Game Experience Questionnaire [ 60], or the
Igroup Presence Questionnaire [ 61]. Therefore, an interesting direction for future work is
to make further comparisons addressing these aspects in more depth.
An interesting finding of this article was that most students preferred to learn through
virtual reality serious games or LEGO Serious Play activities rather than through traditional
teaching methods. However, no comparison was conducted between these game-based
learning approaches and traditional teaching using control and experimental groups. Thus,
future works should conduct this type of comparison, preferably through randomized
control trials. Other interesting future works could be to examine the long-term impacts of
these approaches through longitudinal studies, as well as to examine them with different
games, technologies, instructional designs, and knowledge areas.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/app14020830/s1, the data collected and analyzed in this study
are available as Supplementary Material File.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.G., D.L.-F. and J.M.; methodology, A.G. and D.L.-F.;
software, D.L.-F. and J.M.; formal analysis, A.G.; investigation, A.G. and D.L.-F.; resources, A.G. and
D.L.-F.; writing—original draft preparation, A.G., D.L.-F. and J.M.; writing—review and editing, A.G.,
D.L.-F. and J.M. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported in part by Universidad Polit écnica de Madrid (UPM) through
the educational innovation projects under Grant IE22.6104 and Grant IE23.6104.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Ethical review and approval were waived for this study due
to the fact that the study only involved the collection of information via surveys and educational
tests and all information collected was anonymized so that the identity of the participants cannot
be ascertained.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: The data collected and analyzed in this study are available as
Supplementary Material. The authors will request after publication that these data be published
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 13 of 15
under an open license in e-cienciaDatos—https://edatos.consorciomadrono.es (accessed on
17 November 2023).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Udeozor, C.; Toyoda, R.; Russo Abeg ão, F.; Glassey, J. Digital games in engineering education: Systematic review and future
trends. Eur. J. Eng. Educ. 2022 ,48, 321–339. [CrossRef]
2. Karakoç, B.; Eryılmaz, K.; Turan Özpolat, E.; Yıldırım, ˙I. The effect of game-based learning on student achievement: A
meta-analysis study. Technol. Knowl. Learn. 2020 ,27, 207–222. [CrossRef]
3. Tokac, U.; Novak, E.; Thompson, C.G. Effects of game-based learning on students’ mathematics achievement: A meta-analysis. J.
Comput. Assist. Learn. 2019 ,35, 407–420. [CrossRef]
4. Hussein, M.H.; Ow, S.H.; Cheong, L.S.; Thong, M.-K.; Ale Ebrahim, N. Effects of digital game-based learning on elementary
science learning: A systematic review. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 62465–62478. [CrossRef]
5. Boyle, E.A.; Hainey, T.; Connolly, T.M.; Gray, G.; Earp, J.; Ott, M.; Lim, T.; Ninaus, M.; Ribeiro, C.; Pereira, J. An update to the
systematic literature review of empirical evidence of the impacts and outcomes of computer games and serious games. Comput.
Educ. 2016 ,94, 178–192. [CrossRef]
6. Hainey, T.; Connolly, T.M.; Boyle, E.A.; Wilson, A.; Razak, A. A systematic literature review of games-based learning empirical
evidence in primary education. Comput. Educ. 2016 ,102, 202–223. [CrossRef]
7. Bodnar, C.A.; Anastasio, D.; Enszer, J.A.; Burkey, D.D. Engineers at play: Games as teaching tools for undergraduate engineering
students. J. Eng. Educ. 2016 ,105, 147–200. [CrossRef]
8. Digital.ai. 15th State of Agile Report ; Digital.ai: Raleigh, NC, USA, 2021; Available online: https://info.digital.ai/rs/981-LQX-968/
images/SOA15.pdf (accessed on 17 November 2023).
9. Verma, P .; Kumar, R.; Tuteja, J.; Gupta, N. Systematic review of virtual reality & its challenges. In Proceedings of the 3rd
International Conference on Intelligent Communication Technologies and Virtual Mobile Networks (ICICV 2021), Tirunelveli,
India, 4–6 February 2021; pp. 434–440.
10. Radhakrishnan, U.; Koumaditis, K.; Chinello, F. A systematic review of immersive virtual reality for industrial skills training.
Behav. Inf. Technol. 2021 ,40, 1310–1339. [CrossRef]
11. Kurniawan, C.; Rosmansyah, Y.; Dabarsyah, B. A Systematic Literature Review on Virtual Reality for Learning. In Proceedings of
the 2019 5th International Conference on Wireless and Telematics, ICWT 2019, Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 25–26 July 2019.
12. Zhang, J.; Chang, J.; Yang, X.; Zhang, J.J. Virtual reality surgery simulation: A survey on patient specific solution. In Next
Generation Computer Animation Techniques, Proceedings of the Third International Workshop, AniNex 2017, Bournemouth, UK, 22–23
June 2017 ; Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in
Bioinformatics); Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; Volume 10582, pp. 220–233.
13. Hernandez, Y.; Ramirez, M.P . Virtual reality systems for training improvement in electrical distribution substations. In Proceedings
of the IEEE 16th International Conference on Advanced Learning Technologies, ICALT 2016, Austin, TX, USA, 25–28 July 2016;
pp. 75–76.
14. Stănică, I.-C.; Dascalu, M.-I.; Moldoveanu, A.; Bodea, C.-N.; Hostiuc, S. A survey of virtual reality applications as psychothera-
peutic tools to treat phobias. In Proceedings of the 12th International Scientific Conference eLearning and Software for Education,
Bucharest, Romania, 21–22 April 2016.
15. Cheng, A.; Yang, L.; Andersen, E. Teaching language and culture with a virtual reality game. In Proceedings of the Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, CO, USA, 6–11 May 2017; pp. 541–549.
16. Rivas, D.; Alvarez, M.V .; Guerrero, F.; Grijalva, D.; Loor, S.; Espinoza, J.; Vayas, G.; Huerta, M. Virtual reality applied to physics
teaching. In Proceedings of the 2017 9th International Conference on Education Technology and Computers, Barcelona, Spain,
20–22 December 2017; pp. 27–30.
17. Kami ´ nska, D.; Sapi ´ nski, T.; Wiak, S.; Tikk, T.; Haamer, R.E.; Avots, E.; Helmi, A.; Ozcinar, C.; Anbarjafari, G. Virtual reality and its
applications in education: Survey. Information 2019 ,10, 318. [CrossRef]
18. Pirker, J.; Dengel, A.; Holly, M.; Safikhani, S. Virtual Reality in Computer Science Education: A Systematic Review. In Proceedings
of the 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, Virtual Event, Canada, 1–4 November 2020.
19. Mayor, J.; L ópez-Fern ández, D. Scrum VR: Virtual reality serious video game to learn Scrum. Appl. Sci. 2021 ,11, 9015. [CrossRef]
20. López-Fern ández, D.; Mayor, J.; Perez, J.; Gordillo, A. Learning and Motivational Impact of Using a Virtual Reality Serious Video
Game to Learn Scrum. IEEE Trans. Games 2023 ,15, 430–439. [CrossRef]
21. Lopez-Fernandez, D.; Mayor, J.; Garcia-Perez, M.; Gordillo, A. Are virtual reality serious video games more effective than web
video games? IEEE Comput. Graph. Appl. 2023 ,43, 32–42. [CrossRef]
22. Caserman, P .; Gobel, S. Become a Scrum Master: Immersive virtual reality training to learn Scrum framework. In Serious Games ;
Ma, M., Fletcher, B., Göbel, S., Hauge, J.B., Marsh, T., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020; pp. 34–48.
23. Radhakrishnan, U.; Koumaditis, K. Teaching Scrum with a Virtual Sprint Simulation: Initial design and considerations. In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology, Virtual Event, Canada, 1–4 November
2020; pp. 1–2.
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 14 of 15
24. Visescu, I.; Blindu, A.; Radhakrishnan, U.; Kadenic, M.; Chinello, F.; Koumaditis, K. Teaching project management in a virtual
environment: The Virtual Scrum Simulator (ScrumSim). In Proceedings of the 2022 Nordic Human-Computer Interaction
Conference, Aarhus, Denmark, 8–12 October 2022; pp. 1–2.
25. LEGO Serious Play. Available online: https://www.lego.com/themes/serious-play/background (accessed on 17 November
2023).
26. Roos, J.; Victor, B. How It All Began: The Origins Of LEGO®Serious Play®.Int. J. Manag. Appl. Res. 2018 ,5, 326–343. [CrossRef]
27. Dann, S. Facilitating co-creation experience in the classroom with Lego Serious Play. Australas. Mark. J. 2018 ,26, 121–131.
[CrossRef]
28. James, A.R. Lego Serious Play: A three-dimensional approach to learning development. J. Learn. Dev. High. Educ. 2013 ,6.
[CrossRef]
29. Hansen, P .K.; O’Connor, R. Innovation and learning facilitated by play. In Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning ; Springer: Boston,
MA, USA, 2012; pp. 1569–1570.
30. Nielsen, C.B.; Adams, P . Active learning via LEGO MINDSTORMS in Systems Engineering education. In Proceedings of the 2015
IEEE International Symposium on Systems Engineering (ISSE), Rome, Italy, 28–30 September 2015; IEEE: Piscataway, NJ, USA,
2015; pp. 489–495.
31. Kurkovsky, S. Teaching software engineering with LEGO serious play. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Innovation
and Technology in Computer Science Education, Vilnius, Lithuania, 4–8 July 2015; pp. 213–218.
32. Kurkovsky, S.; Ludi, S.; Clark, L. Active learning with LEGO for software requirements. In Proceedings of the 50th ACM
Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (SIGCSE 2019), Minneapolis, MN, USA, 27 February 2019; Association for
Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2019; pp. 218–224.
33. Kurkovsky, S. Using LEGO to teach software interfaces and integration. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual ACM Conference on
Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education, Larnaca, Cyprus, 2–4 July 2018; pp. 371–372.
34. Kurkovsky, S. A LEGO-based approach to introducing test-driven development. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on
Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education, Arequipa, Peru, 9–13 July 2016; pp. 246–247.
35. Kurkovsky, S. A simple game to introduce Scrum concepts. In Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium on Computer
Science Education (SIGCSE 2020), Portland, OR, USA, 11–14 March 2020; p. 1321.
36. López-Fern ández, D.; Gordillo, A.; Ortega, F.; Yague, A.; Tovar, E. LEGO®Serious Play in Software Engineering Education. IEEE
Access 2021 ,9, 103120–103131. [CrossRef]
37. Krivitsky, A. lego4scrum: A Complete Guide. A Great Way to Teach the Scrum Framework and Agile Thinking ; Self-published by Alexey
Krivitsky: Kyiv, Ukraine, 2017.
38. Veli´ c, M.; Padavi´ c, I.; Dobrovi´ c, Ž. Metamodel of Agile Project Management and the Process of Building with LEGO®Bricks. In
Proceedings of the 23rd Central European Conference on Information and Intelligent Systems (CECIIS 2012), Varazdin, Croatia,
19–21 September 2012; pp. 481–493.
39. Gama, K. An experience report on using LEGO-based activities in a software engineering course. In Proceedings of the XXXIII
Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering, Salvador, Brazil, 23–27 September 2019; pp. 289–298.
40. Paasivaara, M.; Heikkilä, V .; Lassenius, C.; Toivola, T. Teaching students Scrum using LEGO blocks. In Proceedings of the 36th
International Conference on Software Engineering, Hyderabad, India, 31 May–7 June 2014; pp. 382–391.
41. Gama, K.; Oliveira, H. An experience report on teaching Scrum principles in a playful way through distant collaboration with
online whiteboards. In Proceedings of the XXXVI Brazilian Symposium on Software Engineering (SBES ’22), Virtual, 5–7 October
2022; pp. 143–152.
42. Steghofer, J.-P .; Burden, H. One block on top of the other: Using Minetest to teach Scrum. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE/ACM
44th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering Education and Training, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,
25–27 May 2022; pp. 176–186.
43. Lee, W.L. SCRUM-X: An interactive and experiential learning platform for teaching Scrum. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Education, Training and Informatics (ICETI 2016), Orlando, FL, USA, 8–11 March 2016; pp. 192–197.
44. Christensen, E.L.; Paasivaara, M. Respond to change or die: An educational Scrum simulation for distributed teams. In
Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE 44th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering Education and
Training, Pittsburgh, PA, USA, 25–27 May 2022; pp. 235–246.
45. Rodriguez, G.; Soria, Á.; Campo, M. Virtual Scrum: A teaching aid to introduce undergraduate software engineering students to
Scrum. Comput. Appl. Eng. Educ. 2015 ,23, 147–156. [CrossRef]
46. Fernandes, J.M.; Sousa, S.M. PlayScrum—A card game to learn the Scrum agile method. In Proceedings of the 2010 Second
International Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious Applications, Braga, Portugal, 25–26 March 2010; pp. 52–59.
47. Marshburn, D.G.; Sieck, J.P . Don’t break the build: Developing a Scrum retrospective game. In Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, Maui, HI, USA, 8–11 January 2019; pp. 6988–6996.
48. Von Wangenheim, C.G.; Savi, R.; Borgatto, A.F. SCRUMIA—An educational game for teaching Scrum in computing courses. J.
Syst. Softw. 2013 ,86, 2675–2687. [CrossRef]
49. Villavicencio, M.; Narvaez, E.; Izquierdo, E.; Pincay, J. Learning Scrum by doing real-life projects. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE
Global Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON 2017), Athens, Greece, 25–28 April 2017; pp. 1450–1456.
50. May, J.; York, J.; Lending, D. Play Ball: Bringing Scrum into the classroom. J. Inf. Syst. Educ. 2016 ,27, 87–92.
Appl. Sci. 2024 ,14, 830 15 of 15
51. Schwaber, K.; Sutherland, J. Scrum Guide 2020. Available online: https://scrumguides.org/docs/scrumguide/v2020/2020
-Scrum-Guide-US.pdf (accessed on 17 November 2023).
52. Agile Alliance Agile Alliance Web Portal. Available online: https://www.agilealliance.org (accessed on 17 November 2023).
53. Bishop, I.; Rizwan Abid, M. Survey of locomotion systems in virtual reality. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference
on Information System and Data Mining, Lakeland, FL, USA, 9–11 April 2018; pp. 151–154.
54. Dumlu, B.N.; Demir, Y. Analyzing the user experience of virtual reality storytelling with visual and aural stimuli. In Design, User
Experience, and Usability. Design for Contemporary Interactive Environments, Proceedings of the 22nd HCI International Conference, HCII
2020, Copenhagen, Denmark, 19–24 July 2020 ; Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Marcus, A., Rosenzweig, E., Eds.; Springer:
Cham, Switzerland, 2020; Volume 12201.
55. Rangaswamy, S. Visual storytelling through lighting. In Proceedings of the Game Developers Conference, San Jose, CA, USA,
8–12 March 2000.
56. Cohen, J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences , 2nd ed.; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 1988.
57. Caserman, P .; Hoffmann, K.; Müller, P .; Schaub, M.; Straßburg, K.; Wiemeyer, J.; Bruder, R.; Göbel, S. Quality criteria for serious
games: Serious part, game part, and balance. JMIR Serious Games 2020 ,8, e19037. [CrossRef]
58. Eppmann, R.; Bekk, M.; Klein, K. Gameful experience in gamification: Construction and validation of a gameful experience scale
[GAMEX]. J. Interact. Mark. 2018 ,43, 98–115. [CrossRef]
59. Brockmyer, J.H.; Fox, C.M.; Curtiss, K.A.; McBroom, E.; Burkhart, K.M.; Pidruzny, J.N. The development of the Game Engagement
Questionnaire: A measure of engagement in video game-playing. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 2009 ,45, 624–634. [CrossRef]
60. IJsselsteijn, W.A.; de Kort, Y.A.W.; Poels, K. The Game Experience Questionnaire ; Technische Universiteit Eindhoven: Eindhoven,
The Netherlands, 2013.
61. igroup.org—Project Consortium Igroup Presence Questionnaire (IPQ) Overview. Available online: https://www.igroup.org/pq/
ipq (accessed on 17 November 2023).
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
