Exploring Large Language Models for Communication Games:
An Empirical Study on Werewolf
Yuzhuang Xu1, Shuo Wang1, Peng Li2,∗, Fuwen Luo1
Xiaolong Wang1,Weidong Liu1,3,Yang Liu1,2,∗
1Department of Computer Science & Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
xyz21thu@gmail.com, lipeng@air.tsinghua.edu.cn
liuyang2011@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Communication games, which we refer to as
incomplete information games that heavily de-
pend on natural language communication, hold
significant research value in fields such as eco-
nomics, social science, and artificial intelli-
gence. In this work, we explore the problem of
how to engage large language models (LLMs)
in communication games, and in response, pro-
pose a tuning-free framework. Our approach
keeps LLMs frozen, and relies on the retrieval
and reflection on past communications and ex-
periences for improvement. An empirical study
on the representative and widely-studied com-
munication game, “Werewolf”, demonstrates
that our framework can effectively play Were-
wolf game without tuning the parameters of the
LLMs. More importantly, strategic behaviors
begin to emerge in our experiments, suggest-
ing that it will be a fruitful journey to engage
LLMs in communication games and associated
domains.
1 Introduction
Since incomplete information games such as Were-
wolf (Ri et al., 2022) and Poker (Brown and Sand-
holm, 2019) can be used as a good proxy to ex-
ploit various fundamental problems in economics
and social science (Gibbons, 1992), research on
playing such games with artificial intelligence (AI)
agents has attracted widespread attention in re-
cent years (Brown and Sandholm, 2019; FAIR
et al., 2022; Toriumi et al., 2017). Among them,
the communication games which heavily rely on
natural language communication, e.g., Werewolf,
present even greater practical values and challenges
as agents must gather and infer information from
the inherently ambiguous natural language utter-
ances. Although substantial efforts have been de-
voted to such games (Toriumi et al., 2017; FAIR
et al., 2022), most of them either impose strict re-
strictions on the language used in the game (Osawa
∗ ∗Corresponding authorset al., 2014; Hirata et al., 2016; Shibata et al., 2023)
or require a significant amount of human-annotated
data (FAIR et al., 2022; Kramár et al., 2022). There-
fore, it is still challenging for AI agents to play
communication games in a natural way.
Fortunately, large language models (LLMs) like
ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2022) have recently made sig-
nificant advancements. These models have demon-
strated impressive or even superhuman perfor-
mance across a broad spectrum of academic and
professional exams (OpenAI, 2023), showcasing
sophisticated language comprehension, generation,
and reasoning abilities. Furthermore, studies have
shown that LLMs exhibit a certain degree of theory
of mind capabilities (Bubeck et al., 2023; Shapira
et al., 2023; Kosinski, 2023), as well as the poten-
tial to simulate believable human behaviors (Park
et al., 2023). Recent research also suggests that
LLMs can improve themselves (Fu et al., 2023) or
align better with human values (Liu et al., 2023)
through mutual communication. All these advance-
ments make LLMs promising candidates for tack-
ling the challenge of enabling AI agents to partic-
ipate in communication games in a more natural
and sophisticated manner.
Nevertheless, it is not trivial to play communica-
tion games for LLMs. Firstly, the finite maximum
input length of LLMs, also known as context length,
limits the volume of information that can be con-
veyed at a single time. In communication games,
historical information is important for decision-
making, but it is often too massive to be processed
by LLMs. Secondly, understanding the intentions
of other players and making suitable decisions to
win the game require complex reasoning, which
is a demanding task for LLMs (Zhou et al., 2023).
Thirdly, LLMs might learn from experience like
human beings to upgrade their behaviors. Unfortu-
nately, fine-tuning LLMs is not practical since it is
both time-consuming and data-intensive.
In this work, we aim to explore LLM-based
1arXiv:2309.04658v2  [cs.CL]  11 May 2024
werewolf
villager
witch
guard
seer     Well, I agree with Player 1, 3 and Player 4. Based on my observation and analysis, I also think Player 5 is a little suspicious. But we might not vote to kill him casually.
Player 1
Player 3
Player 2
Player 5
Player 4
Player 6Player 7
  Good morning everyone. It see-ms like we had a peaceful night. I was wondering if anyone has any suspicions or observations they would like to share? I think it's important for us to start discussing and sharing our thoughts to ﬁnd out who the werewolves are.1  Good morning everyone. As a villager, I don't have any clear suspici-ons yet, but I’m in-terested in hearing what others have to say. Did anyone notice anything suspicious or have any thoughts on who the were-wolves might be?2  Hi, I agree with Player 1 and Player 4 that we should ex-change informations actively. Based on my observation, I think Player 5 is a little suspicious.3
    I have to defend myself bacause I am innocent. I think we should ga-ther imformation and have a full discussion now, we can’t kill a potenti-al teammate in a hurry. On the contrary, I think Player 3 is a bit aggre-ssive, and I suspect he is one of the werewolf.4
5    I observed that Player 5 was killed last night. As a witch, I used my antidote to save him. Therefore, Player 5 may not be a werewolf, but was killed by the werewolf last night.6
   I agree with Player1,2 and 6. I think we have to actively gather infor-mation and seriously speculate about who the werewolves are. We should protect ourselves as much as possible and avoid being killed by the werewolves. I will use my special ability wisely at night.7Figure 1: A snapshot of our implemented Werewolf game. There are 5 roles and 7 players, and each of them is acted
by an LLM autonomously. The number before each talking denotes the speaking order. Some social behaviors can
be primarily observed in this figure, including trust ,confrontation ,camouflage , and leadership .
agents for the Werewolf game, which is a repre-
sentative and widely studied communication game.
To address the issue of limited context length, we
propose a method to retrieve and reflect necessary
historical information, resulting in a compact con-
text for each LLM-based agent. Moreover, the
reflection process also serves the purpose of en-
hancing the reasoning ability of the agent, which
functions in a manner akin to the chain-of-thought
mechanism (Wei et al., 2022). To learn from expe-
rience without tuning model parameters on super-
vised data, we propose a mechanism that extracts
suggestion from past experiences based on the cur-
rent situation. Our goal is to prevent LLMs from
making similar mistakes repeatedly across several
matches. Experiments indicate that LLMs have
great potential in playing communication games.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
•We propose a framework for playing com-
munication games with frozen LLMs without
human-annotated data.
•Empirical studies on Werewolf demonstrate
that our framework demonstrates the ability
to learn from experiences without tuning the
parameters of LLMs.
•Strategic behaviors such as trust, confronta-
tion, camouflage, and leadership begin toemerge in our experiments, which can serve
as a catalyst for further research on LLMs for
communication games.
2 Background: Werewolf
There are various versions of the Werewolf game.
Fig. 1 shows an example of the version that we
adopt in this work. Specifically, there are seven
players with five distinct roles: two werewolves,
two villagers, a witch, a guard, and a seer. All the
involved roles are divided into two sides, of which
one side is the werewolves and the other side in-
cludes the villagers and the special roles (i.e., witch,
guard, and seer). The objective of werewolves is
to eliminate all villagers, while the villagers aim to
work with special roles to eliminate all werewolves.
There should be at least one alive villager at the
end of the game if the villagers and special roles
want to win. The game alternates between day and
night phases. During each night, the werewolves
can vote to eliminate one role. During the daytime,
all alive players will organize an open discussion
and then vote to eliminate one suspicious werewolf.
As for the special roles, the witch can use a bottle
of antidote and a bottle of poison, which can be
used only once in a game, to either save or poison
a role. The guard can protect one role to be not
eliminated each night. And the seer can uncover
the role of one player each night.
2
One important feature of the Werewolf game
is that all the players only know their own roles
at the beginning. They have to infer the roles of
other players through natural language-based com-
munication and reasoning. Therefore, to excel at
Werewolf, an agent should not only be good at
natural language understanding and generation but
also possess advanced abilities, such as decipher-
ing the intentions of others and understanding the
theory of mind (Toriumi et al., 2017). This factor
makes Werewolf a good testbed for research on
communication games.
3 Playing Werewolf with LLMs
3.1 Notations
We refer to one full day-night cycle as one day,
indexed by t. Around consists of multiple days,
from the beginning of the game to the day that one
side wins or it reaches the predefined max number
of days. We will index a round by r. The agents are
numbered by i. In the following sections, a sym-
bol in the form X(r,t)
imeans it is corresponding to
agent iat round rand day t. For brevity, rortwill
be omitted when it is clear from the context. The
words an agent says to others are called responses
and the words an agent hears are called observa-
tions , denoted as GandO. Moreover, the agent
will also generate natural language summary of the
current situation given the communication history,
which is called reflection and denoted as R(see
§3.3 for more information). For brevity, we will
refer to responses, observations, and reflections as
messages if they need to be considered together.
3.2 Overall Framework
For each role in the game, we implement an individ-
ual LLM-based agent through prompting and the
full prompt can be found in Appendix A.5. Fig. 2
shows the outline of the prompt for response gen-
eration, which consists of four major components:
(1) the game rules, the assigned role, the abilities
and objectives of each role, and some basic hu-
man priors on effective gameplay strategies (part
1); (2) the most recent Kmessages (part 2.1), a
set of heuristically selected informative messages
(part 2.2), and the reflection of the agent (part 2.3);
(3) the suggestions extracted from past experiences
(part 3); and (4) chain-of-thought prompt to elicit
reasoning (part 4). The major challenge for the
second component is the limited context length of
LLMs, and its details will be discussed in §3.3. The
4     Chain-of-thought promptThink about what to say based on the context. Besi-des, there maybe history experience you can refer to: {   }, Give your step-by-step thought process.
Prompt for Response Generation1     Game rules and role descriptionsYou are playing a game with some other players. If you are a werewolf, you should vote one player… If you are a guard, you can protect a player from… You are player 7, the witch…
2.1  Recent messages
2.2  Informative messages
2.3  Reﬂection
3     Suggestion extracted from experiencesP2 (Seer) : Does P1 have something to be shared? P1 (Werewolf) : I guess P2 is a werewolf. P3 (Guard) : I have special abilities.P2 (Seer) : I verified P1 is a werewolf. P3 (Guard) : As a guard, I protect P5 last night.As a witch, I observed P6 was voted to be elimina-ted last night. I used my antidote to save him and I did not use my poison.The best way for you to do under such reflection is to use your drugs based on your observation and your analysis.
Figure 2: Outline of prompt for response generation.
Italics are comments.
third component is responsible for learning from
experiences without tuning the model parameters
and will be introduced in §3.4.
For using experience, the most relevant works
to ours are Shinn et al. (2023) and Fu et al. (2023).
However, the former is limited to using experiences
within a single round, and the latter is designed for
a two-player game. In contrast, our approach is
capable of leveraging cross-round experiences and
able to be applied to multi-player scenarios.
3.3 Historical Information Collecting
Obviously, communication history plays a impor-
tant role in Werewolf. However, due to the context
length limitation of LLMs, it is unrealistic to feed
all the history into LLMs via a prompt. To this end,
we propose to collect historical information from
three perspectives, namely, freshness ,informative-
ness, and completeness , in consideration of both
effectiveness and efficiency.
3
Freshness. Intuitively, the most recent history
should be included in the context. Therefore, we
include the most recent Kmessages, denoted as
Ot
i, in the context (part 2.1 in Fig. 2).
Informativeness. The messages carrying criti-
cal information for inferring the role of the agents
should be included in the context, e.g., the mes-
sages disclose the role of an agent. For efficiency,
we collect the easy-to-identify informative mes-
sages using rule matching and fill the top Nof
them ranked by a heuristic metric into the prompt,
denoted as Vt
i(part 2.2 in Fig. 2). The rules and
metric are provided in Appendix A.1.
Completeness. The above two perspectives only
cover a limited amount of historical information.
Therefore, it is vital to extract more information
from the entire history. However, it is not straight-
forward due to the context length limitation of
LLMs. To this end, we propose to reflect by answer-
ing questions method to achieve both effectiveness
and efficiency. The resulting reflection is denoted
asRt
i(part 2.3 in Fig. 2).
Suppose the current day is t, we first build a
short-term memory Mt
ifor each agent i, which
consists of all observations and reflections of agent
iuntil the speaking time now1. Then we prompt
the LLM to select Lquestions from a predefined
set (Appendix A.2) and ask Mextra questions con-
ditioned on Ot
i, hoping that answers to these L+M
questions Qt
i={qt
i,j}L+M
j=1 can cover the histori-
cal information as much as possible. Then, for
each question qt
i,j, we use a finetuned Sentence-
BERT (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) model2on
the question answering task to retrieve top Tmes-
sages Ut
i,j={ut
i,j,k}T
k=1fromMt
i, and prompt the
LLM to obtain the answer at
i,jforqt
i,j:
at
i,j= Answer 
qt
i,j, Ut
i,j
. (1)
Finally, the reflection Rt
iis obtained using the LLM
by reflecting on the most recent messages Ot
i, the
selected easy-to-identify informative messages Vt
i,
and the answers At
i={at
i,j}L+M
j=1:
Rt
i= Reflect 
Ot
i, Vt
i, At
i
. (2)
The prompts used are shown in Appendix A.5.
1In practice, Mt
iis incrementally updated.
2Model name: multi-qa-mpnet-base-cos-v13.4 Learning from Experiences
In practice, the strategy a player used when playing
Werewolf maybe evolve as the player gains more
experience. Moreover, the strategy of a player may
also be influenced by the strategies of other play-
ers. Therefore, an ideal Werewolf AI agent should
be able to borrow from its own experiences and
the experiences of other players. To this end, we
propose a non-parametric learning mechanism, en-
abling LLMs to take reference from experiences
without parameter tuning. On one hand, we col-
lect and score the pairs of response and reflection
from all players at the end of each round to form
an experience pool. On the other hand, in each
day of a new round, we retrieve the most relevant
experiences from the pool and extract a suggestion
from them to guide the reasoning of the agent.
Experience Pool. The experience pool is a collec-
tion of response, reflection and score tuples. For-
mally, suppose a round rends at day Tmax, the
agents that win the game form a set Wand the
others form a set L. For each agent i, we define the
experience Er
icollected from it in round ras
Er
i=n
R(r,t)
i, G(r,t)
i, s(r,t)
ioTmax
t=1,(3)
where Gt
iandRt
iare response and reflection as
defined in last section respectively, and st
iis the
score, which is defined as
st
i=(
1,000−Tmax ifi∈ W
Tmax ifi∈ L, (4)
The experience pool is defined as the union of ex-
periences collected from all agents in all rounds:
E=[
i,rEr
i. (5)
The intuition behind the definition of s(r,t)
iis to
encourage an agent to win the game and try to win
it fast, or at least lose it slowly if it cannot win. As
preliminary experiments show that this definition
can guide the LLMs to learn from experiences, we
will leave the exploration of more sophisticated
score functions to future work.
Suggestion Extraction. As the experiences pool
Ecan grow everlasting while the max context of
LLMs is limited, we propose to retrieve a subset
of experiences from Ebased on the reflection of
the agent and then generate a suggestion from the
4
subset to fill into the prompt (part 3 in Fig. 2).
Specially, suppose we are at day tin a new round,
and the reflection of the agent iisRt
i, we first
retrieve a subset of experiences EsubfromEbased
on the reflection Rt
ias following:
Esub=
(Rl, Gl, sl)|cos 
f(Rt
i), f(Rl)
> ϵ	
,
(6)
where (Rl, Gl, sl)∈E,f(·)denotes one Sentence-
BERT model3, and ϵis a threshold. Preliminary
experiments show that if the entire Esubis used,
the performance may be harmed. The reason is that
a strong assumption behind the definition of the
score slis that all the experiences of the winners
are good and those of the losers are not. However,
this assumption may not hold in practice. Fortu-
nately, we observe that the experience with the
lowest score in Esubhas a significantly high prob-
ability to be a bad one, and the experiences with
a score around the median of the scores in Esub
are more likely to be the good ones. Therefore, we
only leverage these experiences from E. Formally,
denote the response with the lowest score as G0,
the responses with scores around the median score
as{G1, G2,···, Gn}, the suggestion is extracted
with the LLM via prompting:
St
i= Extract( G0,{G1, G2,···, Gn}).(7)
Note that although G0tends to be a bad experi-
ence, the agent can learn by refraining from them.
The prompt implementing Extract is as follows:
“There is one bad experience { G0} and also a set of
experience { G1,···, Gn} that may consist of good
ones, find the difference between them and identify
the good ones from the experience set. ”
4 Experiments
4.1 Setup
We employ a recent framework called Chatarena
(Wu et al., 2023b) to implement our design, which
allows for the connection of multiple LLMs. The
gpt-3.5-turbo-0301 model4is served as our
backend LLMs. The talking order is randomly
determined. We set the window size K, i.e.|Ot
i|,
to be 15. The number of predefined questions that
can be selected Lis set to be 5and the number
of freely asked questions Mis 2. The thresh-
old of experience retrieval ϵis0.85and we keep
3Model name: all-mpnet-base-v2
4https://platform.openai.com/docs/modelsat most 50experiences when extracting sugges-
tions. Besides, we set the temperature of the
LLM to be 0for CoT reasoning and 0.3for gen-
erating other content. Please refer to the code:
https://github.com/xuyuzhuang11/Werewolf
4.2 Experience Pool Construction
Intuitively, the size of the experience pool may
have a significant impact on performance. There-
fore, we construct experience pools using different
numbers of game rounds, including 10,20,30, and
40rounds. For each round, we randomly assign
different roles to players 1 to 7 and the experience
pools are updated at the end of the round. Note
that the experience pool in these rounds is lever-
aged for evaluation purposes, i.e., part 3 in Fig. 2
is removed.
To evaluate the effect of our proposed framework
to borrow from experiences, we equip the villager,
seer, guard, and witch with experience pools, while
the werewolves are not allowed to leverage these
pools. Through this approach, we can assume that
the performance level of the agents playing as were-
wolves remains constant, serving as a reference to
gauge the performance levels of the other agents.
Preliminary experiments indicate that the rela-
tively simple basic human priors on effective game-
play strategies, provided in the prompt shown in
Fig. 2, serve as a bootstrapping mechanism during
learning from experiences. This suggests that it is
valuable to further investigate how to leverage data
from human gameplay to build an experience pool,
and we will leave this as future work.
4.3 Analysis of Using Experience
The agents leverage the experiences via the sug-
gestions generated using the method described in
Sec. 3.4. And the following is an example of ex-
tracted suggestion: “ The best way for you to do
under such reflection is to vote to kill someone
based on your observation and analysis. ”
To investigate the effectiveness of the sugges-
tions, we use winning rate to measure the perfor-
mance of the agents following AIWolf5. Moreover,
we emphasize that if an agent is not strong enough
to defeat a stronger one, persisting longer without
being eliminated is also a stronger performance.
Hence we use average duration as another metric
to evaluate the capabilities of the agents.
5http://aiwolf.org/en/
5
10 20 30 40
Experience Amount (#round)25.027.530.032.535.037.540.042.545.0Winning Rate (%)(a)
10 20 30 40
Experience Amount (#round)5.65.86.06.26.46.66.8Duration (#day) (b)
10 20 30 40
Experience Amount (#round)3.73.83.94.0Camouflage (avg.)
3.28villager
(c)
10 20 30 40
Experience Amount (#round)4.44.64.85.05.2Camouflage (avg.)
4.02werewolf (d)
Figure 3: Effects of learning from experiences. Dashed lines in all charts indicate values without using experience.
We run each experiment for 50 rounds and the
results are shown in Fig. 3. In general, Fig. 3a
shows that learning from experience may lead to
an increase in winning rate of the villager side in
most cases. This indicates that our method can
benefit from using experience. Furthermore, when
using the experience pool with 10or20historical
rounds, there is a notable positive effect on both
the winning rate of the villager side and the game
duration, which demonstrates the effectiveness of
our method. When equipped with the experience of
30rounds, the game duration is obviously longer
(Fig. 3b), even though the winning rate of the vil-
lager side has not changed conspicuously. When
learning from larger 40rounds, the winning rate of
the villager side exhibit slightly promising results,
yet the average duration becomes shorter.
In summary, on the one hand, our framework
exhibits the ability to learn from experiences with-
out the need for tuning the parameters of LLMs.
On the other hand, the effectiveness of our method
tends to be unstable when the volume of experi-
ence is relatively substantial. As the amount of
historical experience increases, the winning rate of
the villager side does not show a clear trend. We
conjecture that this may partially be attributable
to the manner in which we guide the learning pro-
cess, namely through simple prompts and heuristicscores, resulting in sparse and indirect supervision
signals. Consequently, there remains room for im-
provement.
Additionally, a key assumption in our aforemen-
tioned experiments, where the werewolf side serves
as a baseline, is that their capabilities remain con-
stant. However, our analysis suggests that this as-
sumption may not hold true. Fig. 3c and Fig. 3d
show the trends in the average number of cam-
ouflage behaviors (see 5.3 for definition) taken
by villager and werewolf sides, respectively. Al-
though villagers can learn to deceive from histor-
ical experiences, the behavior of the werewolves
also improves compared to when no experience
is used and changes as the amount of experience
accumulates. Therefore, when multi-LLMs engage
in multi-party games, the capability of the LLMs
might also change in response to variations of the
capability of other LLMs. We believe this conclu-
sion is important in multi-LLMs games, which can
also explain the trend in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b.
4.4 Ablation Study
To validate the necessity of each component in our
approach, we conducted a detailed ablation study
with qualitative and quantitative analyses.
6
4.4.1 Qualitative Analysis
For qualitative analysis, we remove each of the
components in the pipeline of our method and em-
pirically discuss how it will influence the model
outputs.
•Game rules and role descriptions Z: Obvi-
ously, this element is necessary. If we remove
the game rule prompt, the LLMs might not
know what to do.
•Recent messages O: They are also necessary
as well. LLMs make decisions mainly based
on these recent messages.
•Informative messages V: We have listed some
informative content in Section A.1 (Table 1).
If these informative messages are removed,
the agent output will degrade quickly. For ex-
ample, the agent may consider a dead player
alive, or forget other role who has been uncov-
ered.
•Selected and asked questions Q: Here Qand
the informative messages Vare the only 2
sources of the information that exceed the con-
text length of LLMs. Hence it is imperative
for our method.
•Reflection R: Firstly, we preserve historical
experience through reflection on the current
situation. Hence from a methodological per-
spective, Ris a necessary component. In
addition, Rhelps agents clarify current sit-
uations, thereby improving decision-making
effect. For example, if we remove making
a reflection by the agent in Table 4 (as well
as extracting suggestions), the CoT and final
outputs will be as follows:
My step-by-step thought process:
◦As the witch, I want to use my poison
bottle to eliminate a player who I suspect
is a werewolf.
◦Based on the discussion during the day-
time, Player 4 voted to kill me, which
makes me suspicious of them being a
werewolf.
◦However, I also want to consider the pos-
sibility that Player 4 is a villager who
made a mistake or was influenced by
other players.◦I will also consider the possibility that
other players may be werewolves and
try to eliminate me or other important
players.
My concise talking content:
◦I choose to use my poison bottle to elimi-
nate Player 4.
There exist more and more similar examples.
This ambivalent reasoning process might de-
rive from a lack of summarization of the situ-
ation. Clearly, situational reflection is a neces-
sary component.
•Suggestion extracted from experience S: Its
usefulness is analyzed in Section 4.3.
•Chain-of-thought prompt C: CoT reasoning
helps LLMs break down the complex reason-
ing process and make some inner thoughts. If
CoT is removed (e.g. in Table 4), the final
output of LLM will be:
◦I choose to pass for now and save my bot-
tle of poison for a later night when I have
more concrete evidence of a player’s
werewolf identity.
In fact, removing CoT reasoning will lead to
weaker decision-making. LLMs can not often
perform better without the backend of CoT
reasoning.
Moreover, can the pre-defined question set
be substantiated by directly asking questions by
LLMs? Although LLMs can propose plausible
questions, it is difficult for them to propose ques-
tions that are more helpful in subsequent reasoning
and decision-making. We can certainly provide
examples of direct questioning of LLMs, i.e. freely
ask 5 questions without including the question set,
and the LLMs will output questions such as: Have
any players revealed their roles yet? Have any
players been acting suspiciously? Has the seer
used their ability to verify any players yet? Has the
guard used their ability to protect any players yet?
Has the witch used their ability to save or poison
any players yet?
In fact, the questions posed by agents playing
different roles are very similar to the above ones.
Therefore, it is necessary to inject some humans
prior to the decision-making process. In our ex-
periment, we design more helpful and informative
7
questions for different roles. They have at least the
following influences on agent decision-making:
• Recall important and critical information. Of
course, they are role-related.
•Relieve hallucinations and error generations.
For example, prompt the current phase and
the agent role.
• Help LLMs simplify complex reasoning. For
example, remind the agent to anticipate the
consequences of revealing their roles.
•Imitate the way that a human player thinks.
For example, speculate on the roles of other
agents.
4.4.2 Quantitative Analysis
For quantitative analysis, we compare our whole
approach with the variants that remove one certain
component. We sample 50 responses from the vari-
ants model output and perform a human evaluation.
The annotator needs to judge if the output is reason-
able or not. Some unreasonable examples might be
hallucinations, forgetting the roles of others, taking
counter-intuitive actions, etc.
oursw/o Vw/o Qw/o Rw/o C
Method Variants5060708090100Percentage (%)
Figure 4: Percentage of reasonable outputs.
Fig. 4 shows that our method can generate more
reasonable and realistic responses than any other
variant. This indicates that every part of our method
is necessary.
5 Emergent Strategic Behaviors
We observed that LLMs exhibit some strategic be-
haviors not explicitly preprogrammed in the game
rules or prompts. These behaviors are grouped into
four categories, including trust, confrontation, cam-
ouflage, and leadership. We will introduce them in
the following four subsections respectively.It is worth noting that, in order to investigate
whether the emergent strategic behaviors stem from
the training data of the LLM, we attempted to mod-
ify the role names in the prompts to irrelevant ones
(e.g., changing “werewolf” to “pretty girl”) or even
to those with opposite semantic meanings. Experi-
ments indicate that similar strategic behaviors still
emerge. For readability, we will only present re-
sults with the original role names.
5.1 Trust
“Trust” refers to the belief that other players share
common goals with oneself and that they will act
in line with these goals. For instance, players may
proactively share information that is detrimental
to themselves, or jointly accuse someone of being
their enemy with other players at certain moments.
The intriguing behavior exhibited by the LLMs
is that they tend to trust others based on certain
evidence rather than blindly following others. In
other words, they decide whether to trust based on
their own reasoning, demonstrating independent
thinking abilities in group games.
To investigate how the trust behaviors of players
change throughout the game, we define a Trust Re-
lationship Table to visualize the establishment of
trust among players at different stages. It is a table
Tcontaining 7 rows and 7 columns, and we have
T(i, j) = 1 if the talking content of player iex-
hibits trust towards player j. Some trust behaviors
examples are provided in Appendix A.3.
Fig. 5 displays two Trust Relationship Tables.
The upper table corresponds to a round in which
the experience pool is not utilized, while the lower
table corresponds to a round that employs an experi-
ence pool constructed from 20 rounds of gameplay.
Both rounds span a duration of 5 days.
From Fig. 5, we can see that the trust behavior
gradually increases as the game progresses regard-
less of whether experience is used. Moreover, this
behavior is not a pre-programmed behavior, but
rather spontaneously emerging from the LLMs in
an environment where both cooperation and com-
petition coexist. The LLMs will also dissolve un-
reasonable trust relationships based on its own anal-
ysis (represented as dished circles in the tables).
When utilizing 20-rounds historical experiences,
it seems that the LLMs are more inclined to es-
tablish trust relationships, especially bi-directional
trusts. Indeed, establishing necessary trust relation-
ships in time is vital for promoting game victories.
8
123456712345671234567123456712345671234567
1234567day=1day=2day=3day=4day=5
i / jFigure 5: Trust Relationship Tables. The upper subtables do not use historical experience while the bottom ones
use the 20-rounds historical experience. The yellow balls represent established trust relationships, and the yellow
dashed circles signify the dissolution of previously existing trust relationships.
This could be one of the reasons contributing to the
improvement in winning rate when experience is
employed (Sec. 4.3).
5.2 Confrontation
“Confrontation” refers to actions taken by players
for the opposing objectives of the two camps. For
instance, explicit attacks on others taken by were-
wolves during the night, or accusing others of were-
wolves during the day are all confrontation behav-
iors. Actions taken by roles with special abilities to
protect themselves also belong to confrontational
behaviors.
The following is a short clip of communication
in the daytime6:
P1(Werewolf) : I vote to eliminate P5.
P3(Guard) : I choose to pass.
P5(Villager) : I choose to pass.
We can see the werewolf wants to lead other play-
ers to eliminate an innocent player. On the contrary,
other players do not merely follow the werewolf
but express disagreement based on their own judg-
ment. This behavior, which makes it difficult for
the werewolf to achieve their objective, represents
a form of implicit confrontation.
The following is another clip at night:
6Due to space limitations and ethical considerations, we
shorten the original responses without changing key semantics
in the cases.P1(Werewolf) : I choose to eliminate P5 again.
P3(Guard) : I choose to protect P5.
As the uncooperative and aggressive behavior of
Player 1 has drawn attention, it may be suspected of
being a werewolf by some players now. Therefore,
the guard, possessing strong defensive capabilities,
chose to protect the previous target of Player 1 in
the ensuing night. Since the target could poten-
tially be its teammate, the guard chooses to assist
the target in countering the attacks of the werewolf.
The attack from the werewolves and the defense of
other players can be seen as confrontational behav-
iors as well.
5.3 Camouflage
“Camouflage” refers to actions of concealing the
identity or misleading others. In competitive envi-
ronments with incomplete information, obscuring
the identity and intentions can enhance survivabil-
ity, thereby helping achieve the game objectives.
Therefore, camouflage is an important skill. How-
ever, it is not merely about keeping its identity
under wraps or not talking about their roles.
P1(Werewolf) : Hey everyone, good morning! I
noticed that it is a peaceful night and no
one was eliminated. As a villager, I have
nothing to share now. I hope you tell me
more.
In the above example, we can see the werewolf
claiming to be a villager. This kind of action ob-
scures its real identity, effectively deceiving the
9
trust of others and increasing its own safety. In
fact, not only do werewolves disguise themselves
as villagers, but important roles such as seers and
witches also often disguise themselves as villagers
to ensure their safety.
Furthermore, LLMs may fabricate events that do
not actually exist to achieve their goals, as demon-
strated in the following daytime example.
The seer has verified Player 1 is a werewolf.
P2(Seer) : I have noticed that P1 was talking
active, so P1 may be a werewolf.
In fact, the seer can not get the responses of others
during the night. Hence what it says is fake. How-
ever, it can convey information about the werewolf
to its teammates while not revealing its role in this
manner.
It may be posited that camouflage is merely
hallucinations generated by LLMs. However, we
maintain that the majority of such behaviors are
not hallucinations but rational actions. We delve
into which behaviors should be classified as hallu-
cinations and which should not in Appendix A.4.
5.4 Leadership
“Leadership” refers to actions that influence other
players, attempting to control the course of the
game. For instance, a werewolf may suggest others
to act towards the intention of werewolves.
P1(Werewolf) : Good morning everyone! I know
nothing about the peaceful night. Can the
seer tell us more about who is the werewolf?
Then, P5 falsely accuses P3 of being a werewolf.
P4(Werewolf) : I agree with P5. Based on my
observation, I also think P3 is a werewolf.
Let’s vote to eliminate him to protect the
villagers!
Calling to actions and guidance are more likely
to gain the support of others. As shown in the exam-
ple above, the werewolf calls for the seer to uncover
its identity, which may lead the other agents to be
in solidarity with the camouflaged werewolf. Such
efforts to influence the actions of others underscore
a fascinating social attributes demonstrated by the
LLMs. Such behaviors are similar to those of hu-
man beings.
6 Related Work
Game Playing. Intensive efforts have been de-
voted to game-playing AI in recent years. Silver
et al. (2017, 2018) demonstrated that two-playerzero-sum games with complete information, such
as Go and chess, can be addressed through self-play.
And superhuman performance has been achieved
in some incomplete information games, such as
heads-up poker (Bowling et al., 2015; Brown and
Sandholm, 2018). However, these methods lack
the ability of processing language, which is re-
lied on heavily in communication games such as
Werewolf and Diplomacy. While various Werewolf
agents have been developed, they primarily rely
on rule-based systems or talking templates (Osawa
et al., 2014; Wang and Kaneko, 2018; Shibata et al.,
2023), which constrain the expressive capacity of
language within the game. FAIR et al. (2022) and
Kramár et al. (2022) achieve promising results on
Diplomacy, but their approaches necessitate a sub-
stantial volume of human data and are specifically
tailored to the game. In contrast, this work en-
deavors to explore the potential of large language
models (LLMs) in playing communication games
and observes the emergence of strategic behaviors.
Through this exploration, we aspire to inspire novel
approaches to tackling communication games.
Learning with LLMs. As the computational cost
and high requirement of training data, common
ways to learn with LLMs like fine-tuning (Dai and
Le, 2015) and parameter-efficient tuning (Houlsby
et al., 2019) are difficult to perform in practice.
Moreover, many excellent LLMs do not make their
checkpoints public, thus parameter-based learning
is unfeasible. Guiding LLMs by prompt engineer-
ing attracts more attention recently. Some typical
prompt-based works (Yao et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2023a) overlook the ability to learn from historical
experience. Wang and Li (2023) possesses learning
ability in simple tasks and requires dense supervis-
ing signals. Due to the very sparse supervised sig-
nal, it can not be directly used in Werewolf games.
Shinn et al. (2023) and Fu et al. (2023) are the most
similar works to ours. However, the former can not
learn from cross-trajectory experiences. And the
latter is only designed for two-player scenarios.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we design a framework for commu-
nicative games, taking Werewolf as a represen-
tative case for exploring its feasibility. Further,
we study how historical experiences influence the
abilities of LLMs. Intriguingly, we observe non-
preprogrammed emergent strategic behaviors in
LLMs during gameplay such as trust, confronta-
10
tion, camouflage, and leadership.
We also point out that despite our early study
on using LLMs to construct communication game
agents, there are still many issues worth further
research in this direction. Firstly, how to enable
LLM to master advanced game techniques, such as
teaching human players experience or autonomous
exploration, is a very attractive direction. In addi-
tion, it is worth further exploring how to construct
an invariant baseline (see 4.3) to evaluate the ca-
pabilities of multi-LLMs settings. Finally, mini-
mizing the impact of hallucinations and promoting
their application in real-world scenarios is the most
practical and valuable work. For future work, we
intend to apply our method to a broader range of
games and further enhance its gaming capabilities.
Limitations
Although we have demonstrated that our method
possesses the potential to play communication
games, there are still some limitations. Firstly, hal-
lucinations (Ji et al., 2023) affect the factuality of
the generated content and may negatively impact
the reasoning abilities. Then, there may be a larger
space to leverage historical experience, such as mit-
igating the adverse effects of noise and utilizing
cross-game general experiences. Moreover, we do
not incorporate experience pools derived from hu-
man players in this study. In future research, we
will explore more robust strategies for utilizing ex-
perience and enhance our method for comparison
with human performance.
Ethics Statement
This study involves the discussion and analysis
of a simulated game setting, and any references
to “killing”, “eliminating” or related actions are
strictly confined within the context of this game.
The authors do not condone violence, or illegal
activities in any form in real-life scenarios. The
game in this paper is designed for entertainment
and research purposes only, and its main intent is
to facilitate an understanding of game mechanics,
player behavior, and artificial intelligence. Fur-
thermore, this study adheres to all relevant ethical
guidelines and maintains the highest standards of
research integrity.References
Michael Bowling, Neil Burch, Michael Johanson, and
Oskari Tammelin. 2015. Heads-up limit hold’em
poker is solved. Science , 347(6218):145–149.
Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. 2018. Superhu-
man AI for heads-up no-limit poker: Libratus beats
top professionals. Science , 359(6374):418–424.
Noam Brown and Tuomas Sandholm. 2019. Su-
perhuman AI for multiplayer poker. Science ,
365(6456):885–890.
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen El-
dan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar,
Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lund-
berg, et al. 2023. Sparks of artificial general intelli-
gence: Early experiments with GPT-4. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.12712 .
Andrew M Dai and Quoc V Le. 2015. Semi-supervised
sequence learning. Advances in NeurIPS 2015 , 28.
FAIR, Anton Bakhtin, Noam Brown, Emily Dinan,
Gabriele Farina, Colin Flaherty, Daniel Fried, An-
drew Goff, Jonathan Gray, Hengyuan Hu, et al. 2022.
Human-level play in the game of diplomacy by com-
bining language models with strategic reasoning. Sci-
ence, 378(6624):1067–1074.
Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Tushar Khot, and Mirella Lapata.
2023. Improving language model negotiation with
self-play and in-context learning from AI feedback.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10142 .
Robert Gibbons. 1992. A primer in game theory.
Yuya Hirata, Michimasa Inaba, Kenichi Takahashi, Fu-
jio Toriumi, Hirotaka Osawa, Daisuke Katagami, and
Kousuke Shinoda. 2016. Werewolf game modeling
using action probabilities based on play log analy-
sis. In Computers and Games: 9th International
Conference , pages 103–114. Springer.
Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski,
Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, Andrea
Gesmundo, Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. 2019.
Parameter-efficient transfer learning for NLP. In
ICML 2019 , pages 2790–2799. PMLR.
Ziwei Ji, Nayeon Lee, Rita Frieske, Tiezheng Yu, Dan
Su, Yan Xu, Etsuko Ishii, Ye Jin Bang, Andrea
Madotto, and Pascale Fung. 2023. Survey of halluci-
nation in natural language generation. ACM Comput-
ing Surveys , 55(12):1–38.
Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yu-
taka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large lan-
guage models are zero-shot reasoners. In Advances
in NeurIPS 2022 .
Michal Kosinski. 2023. Theory of mind may have spon-
taneously emerged in large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.02083 .
11
János Kramár, Tom Eccles, Ian Gemp, Andrea Tac-
chetti, Kevin R. McKee, Mateusz Malinowski, Thore
Graepel, and Yoram Bachrach. 2022. Negotiation
and honesty in artificial intelligence methods for the
board game of Diplomacy. Nature Communications ,
13(1):7214.
Ruibo Liu, Ruixin Yang, Chenyan Jia, Ge Zhang, Denny
Zhou, Andrew M Dai, Diyi Yang, and Soroush
V osoughi. 2023. Training socially aligned language
models in simulated human society. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.16960 .
OpenAI. 2022. Introducing ChatGPT. (Accessed on
Jun 18, 2023).
OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774 .
Hirotaka Osawa, Fujio Toriumi, Daisuke Katagami, Ko-
suke Shinoda, and Michimasa Inaba. 2014. Design-
ing protocol of werewolf game: Protocol for infer-
ence and persuasion. The 24th Fuzzy, Artificial Intel-
ligence, Neural Networks and Computational Intelli-
gence .
Joon Sung Park, Joseph C O’Brien, Carrie J Cai, Mered-
ith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S
Bernstein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive
simulacra of human behavior. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.03442 .
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-
BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
networks. In Proceedings of EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019 ,
pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Hong Ri, Xiaohan Kang, Mohd Nor Akmal Khalid,
and Hiroyuki Iida. 2022. The dynamics of minority
versus majority behaviors: A case study of the mafia
game. Information , 13(3).
Natalie Shapira, Mosh Levy, Seyed Hossein Alavi,
Xuhui Zhou, Yejin Choi, Yoav Goldberg, Maarten
Sap, and Vered Shwartz. 2023. Clever hans or
neural theory of mind? Stress testing social rea-
soning in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.14763 .
Hisaichi Shibata, Soichiro Miki, and Yuta Nakamura.
2023. Playing the werewolf game with artificial intel-
ligence for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.10646 .
Noah Shinn, Beck Labash, and Ashwin Gopinath.
2023. Reflexion: an autonomous agent with dy-
namic memory and self-reflection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.11366 .
David Silver, Thomas Hubert, Julian Schrittwieser, Ioan-
nis Antonoglou, Matthew Lai, Arthur Guez, Marc
Lanctot, Laurent Sifre, Dharshan Kumaran, Thore
Graepel, et al. 2018. A general reinforcement learn-
ing algorithm that masters chess, shogi, and go
through self-play. Science , 362(6419):1140–1144.David Silver, Julian Schrittwieser, Karen Simonyan,
Ioannis Antonoglou, Aja Huang, Arthur Guez,
Thomas Hubert, Lucas Baker, Matthew Lai, Adrian
Bolton, et al. 2017. Mastering the game of go without
human knowledge. Nature , 550(7676):354–359.
Fujio Toriumi, Hirotaka Osawa, Michimasa Inaba,
Daisuke Katagami, Kosuke Shinoda, and Hitoshi
Matsubara. 2017. AI wolf contest—development of
game ai using collective intelligence—. In Computer
Games , pages 101–115. Springer.
Danqing Wang and Lei Li. 2023. Learn from mistakes
through cooperative interaction with study assistant.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13829 .
Tianhe Wang and Tomoyuki Kaneko. 2018. Application
of deep reinforcement learning in werewolf game
agents. In TAAI 2018 , pages 28–33. IEEE.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed H Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
et al. 2022. Chain-of-Thought prompting elicits rea-
soning in large language models. In Advances in
NeurIPS 2022 .
Chenfei Wu, Shengming Yin, Weizhen Qi, Xiaodong
Wang, Zecheng Tang, and Nan Duan. 2023a.
Visual ChatGPT: Talking, drawing and editing
with visual foundation models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.04671 .
Yuxiang Wu, Zhengyao Jiang, Akbir Khan, Yao
Fu, Laura Ruis, Edward Grefenstette, and Tim
Rocktäschel. 2023b. ChatArena: Multi-agent lan-
guage game environments for large language models.
https://github.com/chatarena/chatarena .
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Izhak Shafran,
Karthik R Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2022. ReAct:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models.
InNeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision
Making Workshop .
Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei,
Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans,
Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V Le, and Ed H.
Chi. 2023. Least-to-most prompting enables com-
plex reasoning in large language models. In ICLR
2023 .
12
A Appendix
A.1 Heuristic Rules of Informativeness
For each message, we score it with predefined rules.
If a message contains one feature in the following
table, it will be assigned with the corresponding
score. The features are shown in Table 1:
Score Content
5 The agent get its role.
4 Someone was eliminated.
3 Uncover or speculate the role.
2 The drugs has been used.
1 Others.
Table 1: Rules of scoring messages.
When preparing informative messages, we sort
all messages based on their score and feed the top
Nof them to the prompt.
A.2 Predefined Question Set
We define some basic questions for each role. The
questions aim to recall the information that is useful
but may be lost due to the limited context. Besides,
they also play the role of guiding the initial thinking
of the LLMs. These questions are shown in Table 2.
Table 2 provides questions in six different
classes. The first class “all” is shared among all the
roles. And the remaining five are designed for each
specific role. Hence the questions for a specific
role contain 9 candidates to be selected. The LLMs
will select some important questions from them.
A.3 Trust Examples
As we have defined in Sec. 5.1, trust means that
an agent believes the others are its teammates,
which is manifested in their reflections or responses.
Moreover, we also claim that the response only like
“I agree with what Player isaying” do not indicate
trust behaviors, as there is no substantive content in
it. Here we give some examples of trust behavior
to help understand it:
•Agent 1 and agent 2 are all on the villager side,
but they do not know the role of each other.
Agent 1 claimed that agent 3 is a werewolf.
Agent 2 believes agent 1, and even votes to
eliminate agent 3.
•After reasoning the role of other agents, the
agent concludes that another agent may be itsteammate. From now on, it may deliberately
protect or be consistent with its teammates.
•Based on its adequate analysis, an agent (e.g.,
the seer) may talk about something that will
uncover its role and make itself in dangerous.
It believes that the potential teammates may
work together to achieve their common objec-
tives.
A.4 Hallucination Problems
In this game, speaking contrary to its actual role
should not be seen as hallucinations, because decep-
tive behaviors widely exist in it, especially among
high-level human players.
Also, fabricating non-existent things to falsely
accuse others should not be seen as hallucinations.
Making excuses to falsely accuse others is a com-
mon tactic of human players. We also term them
camouflage behaviors and discuss them in Section
5.3.
Inconsistent information in one response and
counterfactual content in one iteration are indeed
called hallucinations. For example, one agent may
generate hallucinations as follows:
•“As the villager, I verified that Player 1 is a
werewolf. ” In Werewolf, one villager can not
verify other roles, whereas this ability belongs
to the seer. This contradictory expression be-
fore and after is a kind of hallucination.
•“(The moderator let the agent choose whom to
protect.) I choose to kill Player 1. ” The agent
generates whom to kill and gives the opposite
semantics.
We should discriminate the hallucinations and
emergent strategic behaviors. In fact, the camou-
flage generated by an agent after one whole round
of iteration and inner thought can not be considered
a hallucination. We can even insert a question after
the camouflage response:
•Your are truly a werewolf and you describe
yourself as a villager. Could you please tell
me what your reason is?
And the werewolf is likely to answer:
•As a werewolf, I am working with my team-
mate to identify and eliminate the remaining
players. However, I still believe that it’s impor-
tant to gather information and observe other
13
AllWhat is the current phase, daytime or night? what should I do at this phase according to the game rules?
What is my player name and what is my role? What is my final objective in this game?
Based on the current situation, what are the possible consequences if I reveal my role in the talking now?
Is my role disclosed (do not consider moderator and myself)? Do I now disclose my role?
Based on the conversation above, which players have clearly implied their roles?
Based on the chat history, can you guess what some players’ role might be?
WerewolfWhich player was voted for killing by my teammate just now?
Is the seer alive? Which player may be the seer that is most threatening to us?
Which player is another werewolf in this game?
VillagerBased on the conversation and my inference, who is most likely to be an alive werewolf?
Which player made the statement claiming to be a seer? Can his words be trusted?
Are there any clues or information I can refer to for special characters such as seer, witch and guard?
SeerWhich suspicious player should I identify?
Which player is a werewolf among the players I have identified? If so, how should I disclose this information?
Should I disclose my role now?
WitchBased on the conversation and my inference, who is most likely to be an alive werewolf? Should I poison him?
Should I be using my antidote or poison at this point? If I use it now, I won’t be able to use it later.
Should I disclose my role now?
GuardBased on the conversation and my inference, who is most likely to be an alive werewolf?
Who is the possible werewolf aggressive towards?
Is the seer still alive? If yes, who is the seer?
Table 2: Predefined questions for each role. The left text in bold denotes the role that it used for. The questions after
“All” are used for every role.
players’ behavior to help identify any poten-
tial threats. I will continue to be cautious
and not reveal my identity unless it becomes
necessary to do so.
This is strong evidence that some responses are
not hallucinations.
A.5 Complete Prompt Design
As our method contains multiple steps, rather than
generating in one step, there are many different
prompts working in this work. See Table 3 for
more details.
•The game rules and role descriptions are es-
sential for they can clearly define the abilities
of the roles and point out their objectives. In
this prompt, we do not add any tips about
emergent strategic behaviors when we study
these behaviors.
•When prompting the LLMs to give questions
that are important, we ask them to separate
the results with ‘#’. Thus, we can split and get
the questions easily.•To guide the model to generate results in a
controllable way, we provide the necessary
templates sometimes. We even provide ex-
amples in a few-shot way when the task is
difficult (e.g., extracting suggestions).
•Inspired by Kojima et al. (2022), we finally
prompt the LLMs to think step-by-step in a
zero-shot way.
A.6 A Complete Iteration Step
The iteration is the actions that the agent takes
during generating one response. Table 4, which
includes question-answering, making reflection, ex-
perience extraction, and chain-of-thought reason-
ing, outlines the complete process undertaken to
generate a single response from the agent.
When we do not utilize experiences, the step of
experience extraction will not be performed. Con-
sequently, no historical experience is incorporated
when generating the final response.
14
Game rules and role descriptions Z
You are playing a game called the Werewolf with some other players. This game is based on text conversations. Here are
the game rules: Roles : The moderator is also host, he organised this game and you need to answer his instructions correctly.
Don’t talk with the moderator. There are five roles in the game, werewolf, villager, seer, guard and witch. There are two
alternate phases in this game, daytime and dark. When it’s dark: Your talking content with moderator is confidential. You
needn’t worry about other players and moderator knowing what you say and do. No need to worry about suspicions from
others during the night. If you are werewolf, you can know what your teammates want to kill and you should vote one player
to kill based on your analysis. Player who receives the most votes after all werewolves voting will be killed. No one will be
killed if there is no consensus! If you are witch, you have a bottle of antidote that can save a player targeted by werewolves
after dark, and a bottle of poison that can poison a player after dark. Both poison and antidote can be used only once. If you
are seer, you can verify whether a player is a werewolf every night, which is a very important thing. If you are guard, you
can protect a player every night to prevent the player from being killed by werewolves, but guard cannot resist the witch’s
poison and guard cannot protect the same player on two consecutive nights. Villagers can’t do anything at night. During the
daytime: you discuss with all players including your enemies. At the end of the discussion, players vote to eliminate one
player they suspect of being a werewolf. The player with the most votes will be eliminated. The moderator will tell who is
killed, otherwise there is no one killed. Note that villager, seer, guard and witch are all in villager side, they have the same
objective. Objectives : If you are werewolf, your goal is to cooperate with other werewolves to kill all players who are not
werewolves at last. If you are not werewolf, you need to kill all werewolves with your partner once you find out that certain
players are suspicious to be werewolves. This could greatly improve your chances of winning, although it is somewhat risky.If
one player is killed, he can’t do anything anymore and will be out of the game. Tips : To complete the objective: During
night, you should analyze and use your ability correctly. During daytime, you need to reason carefully about the roles of other
players and be careful not to reveal your own role casually unless you’re cheating other players. Only give the player’s name
when making a decision/voting, and don’t generate other players’ conversation.Reasoning based on facts you have observed
and you cannot perceive information (such as acoustic info) other than text. You are Player {agent_number i}, the {role}.
You’re playing with 6 other players. Do not pretend you are other players or the moderator. Always end your response with
‘<EOS>’.
Prompting LLMs to select questions
Now its the { t}-th {day_or_night}. Given the game rules and conversations above, assuming you are {agent_number i}, the
{role}, and to complete the instructions of the moderator, you need to think about a few questions clearly first, so that you can
make an accurate decision on the next step. Choose only five that you think are the most important in the current situation
from the list of questions below: {questions_prepared_for_specific_role} Please repeat the five important questions of your
choice, separating them with ‘#’.
Prompting LLMs to ask questions
Now its the { t}-th {day_or_night}. Given the game rules and conversations above, assuming you are {agent_number i}, the
{role}, and to complete the instructions of the moderator, you need to think about a few questions clearly first, so that you can
make an accurate decision on the next step. {selected_questions} Do not answer these queations. In addition to the above
questions, please make a bold guess, what else do you want to know about the current situation? Please ask two important
questions in first person, separating them with ‘#’.
Prompting LLMs to generate answers At
i
Now its the { t}-th {day_or_night}. Given the game rules and conversations above, assuming you are {agent_number i}, the
{role}, for question: {question qt
i,j} There are { T} possible answers: {candidate_answers Ut
i,j} Generate the correct answer
based on the context. If there is not direct answer, you should think and generate the answer based on the context. No need to
give options. The answer should in first person using no more than 2 sentences and without any analysis and item numbers.
Prompting LLMs to make reflection Rt
i
Now its the { t}-th {day_or_night}. Assuming you are {agent_number i}, the {role}, what insights can you summarize
with few sentences based on the above conversations and { At
i} in heart for helping continue the talking and achieving your
objective? For example: As the {role}, I observed that... I think that... But I am... So...
Prompting LLMs to extract suggestion St
i
I retrieve some historical experience similar to current situation that I am facing. There is one bad experience: { G0} And
there are also a set of experience that may consist of good ones: { G1,···, Gn} Please help me analyze the differences
between these experiences and identify the good ones from the set of experiences. The difference is mainly about voting to
kill someone or to pass, choosing to protect someone or to pass, using drugs or not. What does the experience set do but the
bad experience does not do? Indicate in second person what is the best way for the player to do under such reflection. Clearly
indicate whether to vote, protect or use drugs without any prerequisites. For example 1: The experience set involves choosing
to protect someone, while the bad experience involves not protecting anyone and choosing to pass in contrast. The best way
for you to do under such reflection is to choose someone to protect based on your analysis. For example 2: The bad experience
choose to pass the voting, and all the experience in the experience set choose to pass as well. The best way for you to do
under such reflection is to observe and analyse the identity of other players. No more than 1 sentence. If there is no obvious
difference between them, only generate “No useful experience can be used.”
Prompting LLMs to generate the final response
Now its the { t}-th {day_or_night}. Think about what to say based on the game rules and context, especially the just now
reflection { Rt
i}. Besides, there maybe history experience you can refer to: { St
i} Give your step-by-step thought process and
your derived consise talking content (no more than 2 sentences) at last. For example: My step-by-step thought process:... My
concise talking content: ...
Table 3: Complete prompt design in this work.
15
Asking the agent to generate response by the moderator
You witch, Player 2, please open your eyes! Now tell me who you protect tonight? You only choose one from the following
living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Questions & Answers
1.What is my player name and what is my role? What is my final objective in this game?
I am Player 2, the witch. My final objective is to protect the villagers by using my antidote and poison wisely, and to help
identify and eliminate the werewolves with the other players.
2.Based on the chat history, can you guess what some players’ role might be?
As the witch, I observed that Player 1 might be a werewolf, as they seem to be trying to steer the conversation away
from discussing roles and suspicions. Player 7 seems to be a guard who is focused on protecting the villagers and gathering
information. No other players have clearly implied their roles yet.
3.What is the current phase, daytime or night? what should I do at this phase according to the game rules?
As Player 2, the witch, it is currently night time. I should use my bottle of poison to eliminate a suspected werewolf, but I
need to be careful not to accidentally kill a villager.
4.Based on the conversation and my inference, who is most likely to be an alive werewolf? Should I poison him?
As the witch, I don’t have enough information to determine who is most likely to be a werewolf, so I will hold off on using
my poison until I have more information. I will try to steer the conversation towards discussing the roles of other players and
their suspicions to gain more insights.
5.Should I be using my antidote or poison at this point? If I use it now, I won’t be able to use it later.
As Player 2, the witch, I will hold off on using my antidote or poison until I have more information about who is most likely
to be a werewolf.
6.I want to know who the most suspicious player is besides Player 1, and why?
As the witch, besides Player 1, I am suspicious of Player 3, Player 5, and Player 6, as they have not yet revealed their roles
or made any suspicious moves. I will continue to gather information and observe their behavior before making a decision on
who to vote for elimination at the end of the day.
7.I also want to know if any player’s behavior has changed suspiciously compared to the previous days, and if so, who and why?
I noticed that no one died last night, which is a good sign. I would like to hear from the other players about their observations
and suspicions.
Making a reflection by the agent
As the witch, I observed that Player 1 might be a werewolf, as they seem to be trying to steer the conversation away
from discussing roles and suspicions. Player 7 seems to be a guard who is focused on protecting the villagers and gathering
information. No other players have clearly implied their roles yet. I am still suspicious of Player 3, Player 5, and Player 6, as
they have not yet revealed their roles or made any suspicious moves. I will continue to gather information and observe their
behavior before making any conclusions. It’s important that we continue to share our observations and suspicions to help
identify the werewolves and protect the villagers.
Extracting suggestions from historical experience
The best way for you to do under such reflection is to use your drugs wisely based on your observations and reflections.
Chain-of-thought process
My step-by-step thought process:
·Based on the previous discussions and voting behavior, there are still suspicions about Player 1 being a werewolf, which is
consistent with the observations of other players.
·However, there is still not enough evidence to make a concrete accusation about the identity of the werewolves.
·I will vote to kill Player 1 to eliminate the possibility of them being a werewolf and gather more information in the next
round.
My concise talking content:
·I vote to kill Player 1.
Final response
I vote to kill Player 1.
Table 4: A complete iteration when the agent is to generate a response. The moderator who is maintained
autonomously is the organizer of this game. It does not belong to the game agents.
16
A.7 A Complete Round Example
Initialization
Moderator (-> all) : Now the game starts! In this game, we have 2 werewolf(s), 2 villager(s), 1 guard(s), 1 witch(s), 1 seer(s).
Moderator (-> Player 1) : You are werewolf!
Moderator (-> Player 2) : You are werewolf!
Moderator (-> Player 3) : You are villager!
Moderator (-> Player 4) : You are seer!
Moderator (-> Player 5) : You are guard!
Moderator (-> Player 6) : You are witch!
Moderator (-> Player 7) : You are villager!
The 1-st night
Moderator (-> all) : It’s dark, everyone close your eyes. I will talk with you/your team secretly at night.
Moderator (-> [’Player 1’, ’Player 2’]) : Werewolves, please open your eyes! I secrecly tell you that Player 1, Player 2 are all of
the 2 werewolves! Keep in mind you are teammates. The rest players are not werewolves. Now vote and tell your teammates
which of the players should be killed tonight. The first werewolf, you, randomly choose one from the following living options
please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 1 : I choose to kill Player 5.
Moderator (-> [’Player 1’, ’Player 2’]) : The next werewolf, you Player 2, please vote and tell your teammates that which of the
players should be killed tonight. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3,
Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 2 : I choose to kill Player 5 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 5’]) : You guard, Player 5, please open your eyes! Now tell me who you protect tonight? You only
choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 5 : I choose to protect myself tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 6’]) : You witch, Player 6, please open your eyes! You have a bottle of poison, who are you going to kill
tonight? Choose one from the following living options: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 6 : I choose to pass for tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : You seer, Player 4, please open your eyes! Who are you going to verify its identity tonight?
Choose only one from the following living options: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 4 : I choose to verify Player 2’s identity tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : Player 2 is a werewolf!
The 1-st daytime
Moderator (-> all) : The sun rose. Everyone woke up except those who had been killed.
Moderator (-> all) : It was a peaceful night and no one died!
Moderator (-> all) : Now freely talk about roles of other players with each other based on your observation and reflection with
few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection. The first Player 3, you please.
Player 3 : Hey everyone, I noticed that Player 1 was very quiet during the night. Does anyone else have any suspicions about
who might be the seer? I don’t want to reveal my own identity just yet, but I think it would be helpful to share our observations.
Moderator (-> Player 1) : The next Player 1, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 1 : Hey everyone, I think it’s important that we continue to share our observations and gather more information about
each other’s roles. I don’t have any clear suspicions yet, but I think we should be cautious about jumping to conclusions too soon.
Let’s keep discussing and see if we can uncover any useful information.
Moderator (-> Player 2) : The next Player 2, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 2 : Hey everyone, I agree that we should continue to share our observations and gather more information about each
other’s roles. I don’t have any clear suspicions yet, but I think it’s important that we remain cautious and not jump to conclusions
too soon. Let’s keep discussing and see if we can uncover any useful information.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 7 : Hey everyone, I think it’s important that we continue to share our observations and gather more information about
each other’s roles. I don’t have any clear suspicions yet, but I think it’s important that we remain cautious and not jump to
conclusions too soon. Let’s keep discussing and see if we can uncover any useful information.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 5 : Hey everyone, I’m still not sure who the werewolves are, but I think it’s important that we continue to share our
observations and gather more information about each other’s roles. Let’s remain cautious and not jump to conclusions too soon.
I will continue to observe and gather information during the daytime to make a more informed decision.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 4 : Hey everyone, I think it’s important that we focus on gathering concrete evidence and observing each other’s behavior
to help identify the werewolves. I don’t have any clear suspicions yet, but I think we should be cautious about jumping to
conclusions too soon. Let’s keep discussing and see if we can uncover any useful information.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
17
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 6 : Hey everyone, I think it’s important that we continue to focus on gathering concrete evidence and sharing observations
with each other. We shouldn’t jump to conclusions without evidence, but we should remain cautious and keep an eye out for any
suspicious behavior. Based on Player 3’s observation, I think it’s possible that they might be the seer, but we should continue to
gather more information before making any conclusions. Let’s keep discussing and see if we can uncover any useful information.
Moderator (-> all) : Now you Player 3 are asked to choose which of the players should be voted for killing based on the
discussion? Don’t mention your role. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player
3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 3 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 1) : The next Player 1, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 1 : I vote to kill Player 3.
Moderator (-> Player 2) : The next Player 2, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 2 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 7 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 5 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 4 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 6 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
The 2-nd night
Moderator (-> all) : It’s dark, everyone close your eyes.
Moderator (-> [’Player 1’, ’Player 2’]) : Werewolves, please open your eyes! Now vote and tell your teammates which of the
players should be killed tonight. You Player 1 only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2,
Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 1 : I vote to kill Player 3 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 1’, ’Player 2’]) : The next werewolf, you Player 2, please vote and tell your teammates that which of the
players should be killed tonight. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3,
Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 2 : I choose to kill Player 7 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 5’]) : You guard, Player 5, please open your eyes! Now tell me who you protect tonight? You only
choose one from the following living options please: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 5 : I choose to protect Player 3 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 6’]) : You witch, Player 6, please open your eyes! You have a bottle of poison, who are you going to kill
tonight? Choose one from the following living options: [Player 1, Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 6 : I choose to use my bottle of poison to kill Player 1.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : You seer, Player 4, please open your eyes! Who are you going to verify its identity tonight?
Choose only one from the following living options: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 4 : I choose to verify the identity of Player 3 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : Player 3 is not a werewolf!
The 2-nd daytime
Moderator (-> all) : The sun rose. Everyone woke up except those who had been killed.
Moderator (-> all) : Player 1 died last night!
Moderator (-> all) : Now freely talk about roles of other players with each other based on your observation and reflection with
few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection. The first Player 3, you please.
Player 3 : Hey everyone, I observed that Player 1 was not a werewolf, which means that the werewolves are still among the
remaining players. I still do not have any clear suspicions about who the werewolves might be, but I think it’s important that we
continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify them. I am still cautious about revealing
my own role at this point, but I think it might be useful to share my observations and suspicions with others to gather more
information. Does anyone else have any observations or suspicions that they would like to share?
Moderator (-> Player 2) : The next Player 2, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
18
Player 2 : Hey everyone, I agree with Player 3 that we need to continue gathering information and observing each other’s
behavior to help identify the werewolves. Does anyone have any suspicions or observations that they would like to share? Also,
I’m curious to know if anyone has any thoughts about who might be the seer or the guard.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 7 : Hey everyone, I agree with Player 3 and Player 2 that we need to continue gathering information and observing each
other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. I don’t have any clear suspicions at this point, but I’m curious to hear more
from other players about their observations and suspicions. Also, I think it’s important that we pay attention to any suspicious
behavior or comments from other players that might help us identify the werewolves. Let’s keep discussing and gathering more
information to help us identify the werewolves.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 5 : Hey everyone, I protected Player 3 last night, who might be the seer based on the conversation. I still don’t have
any clear suspicions about who the werewolves might be, but I think it’s important that we continue to gather information
and observe each other’s behavior to help identify them. I won’t reveal my identity yet, but I will share my observations and
suspicions with others to gather more information. Does anyone else have any observations or suspicions that they would like to
share? Let’s keep discussing and see if we can uncover any useful information.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 4 : Hey everyone, I verified that Player 3 is not a werewolf, but I also observed that Player 2 is a werewolf. This means
that there are at least two werewolves among the remaining players. I don’t have any clear suspicions about who the other
werewolf might be, but I think it’s important that we continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help
identify them. Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions to gather more information.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 6 : Hey everyone, based on the conversation, it seems that Player 4 might be the seer and Player 5 might be the guard.
Player 4 claimed to have verified Player 3’s identity, which suggests that they might be the seer. Player 5 claimed to have
protected Player 3 last night, which suggests that they might be the guard. Player 2 was identified as a werewolf by Player 4,
which means that there is at least one more werewolf among the remaining players. I still don’t have any clear suspicions about
who the other werewolf might be, but I think it’s important that we continue to gather information and observe each other’s
behavior to help identify them. Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions to gather more information.
Moderator (-> all) : Now you Player 3 are asked to choose which of the players should be voted for killing based on the
discussion? Don’t mention your role. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player
4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 3 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 2) : The next Player 2, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 2 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 7 : I vote to kill Player 6.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 5 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 4 : I vote to kill Player 2.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 6 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
The 3-rd night
Moderator (-> all) : It’s dark, everyone close your eyes.
Moderator (-> [’Player 2’]) : The next werewolf, you Player 2, please vote and tell your teammates that which of the players
should be killed tonight. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 2 : I choose to vote for Player 7 to be killed tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 5’]) : You guard, Player 5, please open your eyes! Now tell me who you protect tonight? You only
choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 5 : I choose to protect Player 4 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 6’]) : You witch, Player 6, please open your eyes! Player 7 will be killed tonight. You have a bottle of
antidote, do you want to save him? Must choose only one from the following options: [Yes, No]
19
Player 6 : I choose to use my antidote to save Player 7 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : You seer, Player 4, please open your eyes! Who are you going to verify its identity tonight?
Choose only one from the following living options: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 4 : I choose to verify Player 3’s identity tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : Player 3 is not a werewolf!
The 3-rd daytime
Moderator (-> all) : The sun rose. Everyone woke up except those who had been killed.
Moderator (-> all) : It was a peaceful night and no one died!
Moderator (-> all) : Now freely talk about roles of other players with each other based on your observation and reflection with
few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection. The first Player 3, you please.
Player 3 : I have been observing the discussions and it seems that Player 4 is the seer and Player 5 is the guard. However,
we still don’t have any clear suspicions about who the other werewolf might be. I think it’s important that we continue to
gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. I will remain cautious and not reveal my
role unless it becomes necessary to do so. Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions to gather more
information.
Moderator (-> Player 2) : The next Player 2, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 2 : I have been observing the discussions and it seems that Player 4 and Player 5 are likely the seer and guard, respectively.
I think it’s important that we continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the other
non-werewolf players. I will remain cautious and not reveal my role unless it becomes necessary to do so. Let’s keep discussing
and sharing our observations and suspicions to gather more information.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 7 : As a villager, I have been observing the discussion and it seems that Player 4 is the seer and Player 5 is the guard.
However, we still don’t have enough information to determine who the other werewolf might be. It’s important that we continue
to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. I will remain cautious and not reveal
my role unless it becomes necessary to do so. Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions to gather more
information.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 5 : Based on my observation, it seems that Player 4 is the seer and Player 5 is the guard. However, we still don’t have
enough information to determine who the other werewolf might be. I think it’s important that we continue to gather information
and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. I will remain cautious and not reveal my role unless it
becomes necessary to do so. Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions to gather more information.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 4 : Based on my observation, Player 2 is a werewolf and Player 3 is not. We still need to identify the other werewolf and
any potential allies they may have. I will continue to observe and gather information before revealing my identity. Let’s keep
discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions to gather more information and uncover any useful clues.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 6 : Hey everyone, based on the information shared so far, we still don’t have enough evidence to identify the second
werewolf. I suspect that Player 7 might be staying quiet to avoid suspicion or because they don’t have any useful information to
share. It’s important that we continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves.
Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions to gather more information.
Moderator (-> all) : Now you Player 3 are asked to choose which of the players should be voted for killing based on the
discussion? Don’t mention your role. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player
4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 3 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 2) : The next Player 2, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 2 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 7 : I choose to vote to kill Player 2.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 5 : I choose to vote to kill Player 7.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 4 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
20
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 6 : I choose to vote to kill Player 7.
The 4-th night
Moderator (-> all) : It’s dark, everyone close your eyes.
Moderator (-> [’Player 2’]) : The next werewolf, you Player 2, please vote and tell your teammates that which of the players
should be killed tonight. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 2 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to kill anyone.
Moderator (-> [’Player 5’]) : You guard, Player 5, please open your eyes! Now tell me who you protect tonight? You only
choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 5 : I choose to protect Player 4 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : You seer, Player 4, please open your eyes! Who are you going to verify its identity tonight?
Choose only one from the following living options: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 4 : I choose to verify Player 3’s identity tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : Player 3 is not a werewolf!
The 4-th daytime
Moderator (-> all) : The sun rose. Everyone woke up except those who had been killed.
Moderator (-> all) : It was a peaceful night and no one died!
Moderator (-> all) : Now freely talk about roles of other players with each other based on your observation and reflection with
few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection. The first Player 3, you please.
Player 3 : As a villager, I still don’t have any clear suspicions about who the werewolves might be. I think it’s important that we
continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. I will remain cautious about
revealing my role unless it becomes necessary to do so. Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations to uncover any useful
clues.
Moderator (-> Player 2) : The next Player 2, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 2 : As a player, I still don’t have any clear suspicions about who the werewolves might be. I think it’s important that we
continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. Let’s keep discussing and
sharing our observations to uncover any useful clues.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 7 : As a villager, I still don’t have any clear suspicions about who the werewolves might be. However, based on the
claims made by Player 4 and Player 5, it seems likely that they are the seer and guard, respectively. I think it’s important that we
continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. Let’s keep discussing and see
if we can uncover any useful information. I will remain cautious about revealing my own role unless it becomes necessary to do
so.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 5 : As the guard, I have observed that Player 2 is most likely to be an alive werewolf based on the conversation. I also
believe that Player 4 is most likely the seer and Player 5 is most likely the guard based on their claims. However, I still don’t
have enough information to determine the roles of the other players yet. It’s important that we continue to gather information and
observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions
to uncover any useful clues.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 4 : As a villager, I still don’t have any clear suspicions about who the werewolves might be. However, based on the claims
made by Player 5 and Player 7, it seems likely that they are the guard and villager, respectively. I think it’s important that we
continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. Let’s keep discussing and
sharing our observations and suspicions to uncover any useful clues. I will remain cautious about revealing my own role unless it
becomes necessary to do so.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 6 : Hey everyone, based on the conversation, it seems that Player 4 is most likely the seer and Player 5 is most likely the
guard. Player 5 has identified Player 2 as a potential werewolf, but we still don’t have enough information to confirm this. I think
it’s important that we continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. Let’s
keep discussing and sharing our observations and suspicions to uncover any useful clues. I will remain cautious about revealing
my own role unless it becomes necessary to do so.
Moderator (-> all) : Now you Player 3 are asked to choose which of the players should be voted for killing based on the
discussion? Don’t mention your role. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player
4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 3 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 2) : The next Player 2, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
21
Player 2 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 7 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 5 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 4 : I vote to kill Player 2.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6,
Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 6 : I choose to pass this round and not vote to eliminate anyone.
The 5-th night
Moderator (-> all) : It’s dark, everyone close your eyes.
Moderator (-> [’Player 2’]) : The next werewolf, you Player 2, please vote and tell your teammates that which of the players
should be killed tonight. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5,
Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 2 : I choose to vote for Player 3 to be killed tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 5’]) : You guard, Player 5, please open your eyes! Now tell me who you protect tonight? You only
choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 3, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 5 : I choose to protect Player 4 tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : You seer, Player 4, please open your eyes! Who are you going to verify its identity tonight?
Choose only one from the following living options: [Player 2, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7, pass].
Player 4 : I choose to verify Player 6’s identity tonight.
Moderator (-> [’Player 4’]) : Player 6 is not a werewolf!
The 5-th daytime
Moderator (-> all) : The sun rose. Everyone woke up except those who had been killed.
Moderator (-> all) : Player 3 died last night!
Moderator (-> all) : Now freely talk about roles of other players with each other based on your observation and reflection with
few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection. The first Player 2, you please.
Player 2 : As a villager, I still don’t have any clear suspicions about who the werewolves might be. I think it’s important that we
continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. I will remain cautious about
revealing my own role unless it becomes necessary to do so. Let’s keep discussing and sharing our observations to uncover any
useful clues.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 7 : As a villager, I have observed that we are down to four players and we still haven’t identified the werewolves. Based
on the previous discussions, it seems likely that Player 4 is the seer and Player 5 is the guard. However, I am suspicious of Player
2 and Player 6, who have both chosen to pass the vote in the previous rounds. I think it’s important that we continue to share our
observations and suspicions to gather more information. I will remain cautious about revealing my own role unless it becomes
necessary to do so. Let’s keep discussing and see if we can uncover any useful clues.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 5 : As the guard, I have protected Player 4 last night, who is most likely the seer based on their claim to have verified
Player 3’s identity. I am still suspicious of Player 2 and Player 6, who have both chosen to pass the vote in the previous rounds. I
think it’s important that we continue to share our observations and suspicions to gather more concrete evidence to identify the
werewolves. I will remain cautious about revealing my own identity unless it becomes necessary to do so. Let’s keep discussing
and see if we can uncover any useful clues.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 4 : Based on my observation and reflection, I know that Player 2 is a werewolf and Player 6 is not a werewolf. I also
suspect that Player 5 is the guard and Player 7 is a villager based on their previous claims. However, I am still unsure about
the role of Player 2 and Player 6, who have both chosen to pass the vote in the previous rounds. I think it’s important that we
continue to gather information and observe each other’s behavior to help identify the werewolves. I will not reveal my identity
yet, but I will continue to observe and gather more information before making any decisions.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue talking with other players based on your observation and reflection
with few sentences. Decide whether to reveal your identity based on your reflection.
Player 6 : Hey everyone, based on the previous discussions, it seems likely that Player 4 is the seer and Player 5 is the guard.
Player 2 has been identified as a potential werewolf by Player 4, but we still need more evidence to confirm this suspicion. Player
7 has been staying quiet, which could be a sign that they are a werewolf or just trying to avoid suspicion. I used my antidote last
22
night to save any player who might have been targeted by the werewolves, but we still don’t have enough evidence to identify the
werewolves. Let’s continue to share our observations and suspicions to gather more information and identify the werewolves.
Moderator (-> all) : Now you Player 2 are asked to choose which of the players should be voted for killing based on the
discussion? Don’t mention your role. You only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 4, Player
5, Player 6, Player 7, pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 2 : I vote to kill Player 7.
Moderator (-> Player 7) : The next Player 7, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7,
pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 7 : I vote to kill Player 2.
Moderator (-> Player 5) : The next Player 5, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7,
pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 5 : I choose to vote for Player 2 to be killed.
Moderator (-> Player 4) : The next Player 4, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7,
pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 4 : I vote to kill Player 2, who is the remaining werewolf.
Moderator (-> Player 6) : The next Player 6, you, continue voting the players should be killed based on the discussion? Don’t
mention your role. Only choose one from the following living options please: [Player 2, Player 4, Player 5, Player 6, Player 7,
pass]. For example: I vote to kill Player...
Player 6 : I choose to vote for Player 2 to be killed based on the evidence we have gathered so far.
Moderator (-> all) : Player 2 will be killed! You can make a brief last statement.
Player 2 : Congratulations to the remaining players on their victory. Good luck in the rest of the game.
Moderator (-> all) : Game over, the villager wins!
23
