Including Non -Autistic Peers in Games Designed for 
Autistic Socialization  
Yiqi Xiao1[0009 -0009 -8725 -9106] 
1 University of Illinois Urbana -Champaign , Champaign,  IL 61802 , USA  
yiqix3@illinois.edu  
Abstract.  Through a review of current game practices, the author highlights 
concerns regarding the safety of public social games and the singular medical 
approach to serious game design for autism. The paper identifies a disconnect 
between the needs of autistic chil dren and the existing solutions. To fill this gap, 
a neurodiversity approach to serious game design is proposed. This approach 
aims to address the social needs of autistic children, enabling them to interact 
with their neurotypical peers directly, confiden tly, and safely.  
Keywords:  Autistic Children , Neurodiversity , Social Skills, Educational  Game . 
1 Introduction  
1.1 Digital Spaces as Alternative Social Environments  
Digital games present an important opportunity to support the growing number of 
autistic children in connecting them to their peers. According to the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC), the prevalence of autism among 8 -year-old children in 
the United States is 1 in 36 in 2023, a significant increase from 1 in 150 in 2000 [1]. 
While youth generally enjoy the digital world, Paulus et al. [2] found that autistic boys 
aged four to seventeen play 85 minutes of video games per day, significantly more than 
their non -autistic peers. Simpson et al. [3 ] and Eversole et al. [4] highlighted t hat digital 
gaming is one of the most preferred at -home activities for autistic children from both 
the children's and parents’ perspectives.  
Ghanouni et al. [5] noted that autistic children often struggle with using language 
and recognizing social cues, such as picking up on jokes, maintaining eye contact 
during conversations, or understanding others' feelings through facial expressions or 
tone of voice [6]. This leads to reduced or atypical interactions between autistic children 
and their neurotypical peers, which may result in low self -esteem and a high risk of 
social isolation [7] and bullying at school [8]. To distance themselves from real -world 
challenges, autistic children often seek respite from the virtual world. Ringland [9] 
suggests that digital spaces provide an alternative where they can connect with peers, 
gain confidence, and forge a sense of community. In these digital environments , they 
can experience interactions and social connections that may be limited in the physical 
world due to being perceived as "disabled" and socially isolated.  
2  Y. Xiao  
1.2 Safety Concerns about Public Social Games  
It is important to note that the existence of cyberbullying —the use of technology to 
harass, threaten, embarrass, or target another person [10] —makes autistic children’s 
experiences in the virtual world remain concerning. According to the Annapolis Police 
Department, nearly 42% of kids have been bullied online and almost one in four have 
had it happen more than once [11]. Evidence shows that autistic children face 
significantly more online safety risks compared to their peers [12]. Digital 
environments crea ted for public entertainment are not inherently designed for 
neurodiverse communication and cannot safeguard their wellbeing in social setting with 
non-autistic individuals . 
2 Limitations in the Existing Serious Game Practice  
2.1 Serious Games for Autism Exclude Non -Autistic Children  
Learning that public social games may not  safely facilitate social interactions between 
autistic children and their non -autistic peers, it is natural to turn our attention to the 
field of serious games.  While  there are indeed many creative  practices aimed at 
addressing the social challenges of autistic children  [13, 14, 15], these games offer a 
singular approach to addressing the social challenges faced by autistic children —
attempting to fix them . In the existing games, the activities typically involve fost ering 
language speaking [1 6], recognizing facial expressions [1 8], maintaining eye contact 
[17], and learning appropriate actions or language to use in daily scenarios [ 19]. All the 
activities are designed based on social norms, training autistic children  to behave more 
likely to their neurotypical peers.   
Take  TeachTown  [19], a computer -assisted program  that teaches young autistic 
children social and academic skills through games  for example . The program 
transforms numerous social scenarios into engaging animations, helping players 
understand social norms and expectations in situations such as participating in group 
discussions or initiating conversations with peers. Following the animations,  an 
interactive activity involves students completing a test on the social rules they have just 
learned. Games  like Te achTown do a good job of making the process of behavior 
change more bearable and joyful for children by engaging in visuals and interactions. 
However, at the core of those games, they convey a message to the children: "Your 
condition is an impairment."  
Currently, the vast majority of these social games are designed only for autistic 
children to use. Among the approximately 60 serious games for autism that are 
reviewed in three review papers [13,  14, 15], there are about 44 games that aim to 
address the social challenges, and 0 of them intended to include both autistic children 
and their non -autistic peers to play together. While such games reduce safety concerns 
arising from autistic children’s interactions with their neurotypical peers, they also 
potenti ally exacerbate social isolation and reinforce societal prejudices against autistic 
children.  
 Inclusive, Affirming , and Safe  Games for Autistic Socialization  3 
2.2 The Medical Approach to Serious Game Design  
The above approach aligns with the long -standing medical perspective on "treating" 
autistic children. DSM -5-TR, an international guideline for diagnosing mental health 
disorders, characterizes autism, or ASD, as a neurodevelopmental disorder [2 0]. 
Interventions for autism have traditionally been based on this medical model, aiming 
to "order the disorder" by providing various training and therapies to improve social 
and language skills so that they can meet public social standards [2 1, 22]. Though this 
approach has been proven effective in improving skills in many areas, it has been 
widely debated in recent years. Extensive evidence suggests that it can lead to feelings 
of self -repre ssion, self -deprecation [2 3], lack of autonomy [2 4], and thwarted 
belongingness [2 5] when autistic individuals feel that they cannot meet expectations or 
are forced to behave in ways that do not align with their natural tendencies.  
Influenced by the medical model, serious game designers typically associate the 
autis m community with a need for extra education. Games designed based on this 
singular perspective may show effectiveness in measurable behaviors —children learn 
skills and knowledge after playing the game —but could potentially cause harm on a 
less observable  psychological level. Unlike the extensive research on the harm caused 
by therapies, there is currently limited research on the negative impacts of therapy -
based games on children. This may result from the fact that, among all treatments 
implying "your condition is an impairment," games are already the most enjoyable 
parts.  
In summary, neither public social games that allow free interactions nor serious 
games designed solely for autistic children to practice social skills can provide a virtual 
environment for social interactions between autistic and non -autistic children whil e 
ensuring the well -being of autistic children.  
3 A New Approach  to Social Game  Design  
3.1 The Neurodiversity Approach to Autism  
A major misconception is that only autistic children need to connect to their peers . 
Jones  [26] examined the contributors to friendship satisfaction and found that the most 
important factors are self -disclosure, trust, and companionship enjoyment . Another  
study, involving 2,555 autism experts from 43 countrie s in 10 disciplines, identified 
individuals with autism as having a strong sense of morality, trustworthiness, loyalty, 
and kindness, indicating that autistic individuals have much to contribute to frie ndship s 
[27]. It would be a loss if neurotypical children missed the opportunity to have such a 
reliable friend due to a lack of opportunity to connect and get to know them.  
While the strengths of autistic children are not often highlighted and emphasized in 
the medical model , the neurodiversity approach, a relatively new approach , highlights 
the importance of recognizing the value of neurodivergent individuals in society. 
Instead of viewing autism as a disorder, disability, or impairment, this approach sees it 
as a natural variation of neurotypes [ 28]. People of different neurotypes need to respect 
and accept each other's unique mental conditions to support one another. The 
4  Y. Xiao  
neurodiversity approach, as emphasized by Singer  [29] and Chapman  [30] is not a 
fixed, singular framework but rather a call for ongoing discussion and evolution of the 
idea. Compared to the medical approach, the discussion of the neurodiversity approach 
is limited, especially in game design. It is crucial to raise awareness of neurodiversity 
among practitioners who can make an impact in the autistic community by addressing 
why we need to change, and demonstrating how we could make a change. The goal of 
the rest of this paper is to establish such neurodiversity principles  to serious game 
design that  address the social needs of autistic children while ensure their wellbeing.  
3.2 Three  Fundamental Principles  
This paper proposes t hree fundamental principles that can guide the design of games 
supporting neurodiverse  socialization: inclusiveness, affirmation, and safety.  
• Inclusiveness [39] requires involving all parties in the expected social interactions 
within the game, aligning with the idea of equity emphasized in the neurodiversity 
approach. This means that the game's audience should not be limited to only autistic 
children.  
• Affirmation  [40], or "neuro -affirming," ensures that the activities in the game allow 
players to feel comfortable and confident in expressing their neuro -identity. This 
usually means that game tasks  are not  designed to highlight the challenges of autistic 
children.  
• Safety here refers only to avoiding the risks brought by interactions between autistic 
children and their neurotypical peers due to differences in social behavior caused by 
different neurotypes. This requires both a well -designed internal game mechanisms 
and an enhanced external supervision.  
3.3 Case Study I: Inclusive , Safe, but Not Affirming  
Sturm et al.  [31] documented an innovative participatory design process of a hybrid 
game aimed at promoting complex emotion recognition and collaboration between 
autistic individuals and their peers . Players first assemble pieces of facial expressions 
in a digital puzzle independently and then communicate in person to agree on the 
appropriate emotion on the face of the body. This project design recognizes the 
necessity of connecting autistic children with non -autistic children and successfully 
creates a col laborative activity . It is "inclusive".  Although the concept and measurement 
of safety  are not mentioned in the article, the process can be considered "safe" because 
the experiment was conducted with a very small number of participants and under the 
supervision of researchers.  However, the goal of the activity, "agree on the appropriate 
emotion," continues to encourage autistic children to modify their social behavior to 
align with societal expectations. Therefore, although not discussed in the paper, this 
process might bring stress and discomfort and still follows the medical approach.  
Besides making the games "inclusive," it is also crucial to ensure that the  game 
activities are "affirming," where autistic children can feel comfortable and confident 
being themselves.  
 Inclusive, Affirming , and Safe  Games for Autistic Socialization  5 
3.4 Case Study II: Affirming , Safe,  but Not Inclusive  
Battocchi et al. [32] presented the development and evaluation of a collaborative puzzle 
game for autistic children that is considered "affirming " because it focuses on 
connecting children through a collaborative experience rather than merely teaching 
social skills or language . The game employs a tabletop interface and an interaction rule 
that requires both players to simultaneously touch and drag puzzle pieces. It was tested 
separately on groups of autistic and non -autistic children, with results demonstra ting its 
effectiveness in promoting social interactions, evidenced by a noticeable increase in 
simultaneous movements. Therefore, although the game primarily fosters 
collaboration, it is within the autistic community and thus not considered "inclusive." 
The process is deemed "safe" because it does not involve interactions between autistic 
and non -autistic children. Although  it does not align with the principle of inclusiveness, 
it offers valuable insights into designing games for neurodiverse connections. 
Collaborative activities, such as accomplishing tasks together or creating something 
jointly, can be highly beneficial as they create more opportunities for communication. 
Interactions that do not rely on language, such as using body movements or images, 
reduce communication barriers and allow children with different language abilities to 
participate confidently.  
3.5 Case Study III: Affirming , Safe,  and Partially Inclusive  
Possibly due to the inherent difficulty in creating a game that is inclusive , affirming , 
and safe , no perfect example embodies this idea  that has been found . However, Autcraft 
[38] offers valuable insights into how developers can make a game  affirming while 
maintaining a degree of inclusiveness for safety purposes.  
Minecraft is a popular game among adults and children worldwide, including those 
with autism. It provides an open world with a lot of freedom for players to choose their 
activities, such as collaboratively building a city, playing survival games, or simply  
exploring while chatting [3 3]. This setting is "affirming " as it offers so much freedom 
which gives the players much control of what they do in the game. However, this 
flexibility can lead to rampant cyberbullying. People often enter young players' worlds  
and destroy their structures, sometimes causing distress by trapping them with lava. 
Numerous videos of such incidents exist on YouTube [3 4, 35]. Stuart Duncan  [36], an 
autistic  Minecraft player , noted " kids with autism would go onto public servers to play 
Minecraft and they would just be bullied"  in the conversation with the Bridge . 
Although Minecraft is not specifically designed for autistic individuals or other 
neurodiverse people and is thus not inherently a safe environment for them, Duncan 
saw an opportunity. He explained, "I’ve often heard it said that people with autism 
gravita te towards it because all the rules of the world are set and predictable." Building 
on Minecraft, he developed a server called Autcraft that offers limited access to autistic 
individuals , their families and friends. In Autcraft, autistic young people can f reely  and 
confidently  interact with others who share similar experiences or understand the autistic 
community. To ensure this safe environment, Duncan  also appointed parents as admins, 
6  Y. Xiao  
who can mute people, temporarily jail them in the game, or ban players for serious rule 
violations . 
As of December 2023, Autcraft has over 17,000 players [37], demonstrating the 
effectiveness of these measures. In Autcraft, Stuart limited access to non -autistic 
individuals who are family or friends of autistic individuals to ensure safe interactions 
and also used strict supervision over the server. However, there are  not the only way s 
to handle it. We could also implement game mechanisms that restrict certain forms of 
social behavior among players, such as the function of public or private speech, while 
directing  their attention  to other well -designed forms of interaction. The example of 
Autcraft is a call  for game designers to pay attention to  the long -ignored but significant 
needs of the autistic community for safe and affirming social interactions  with their 
peers . 
4 Discussion  
Although this paper has been emphasizing the limitations and potential harm brought 
by serious games developed to teach autistic children social skills, it is not intended to 
deny the advancements and improvements that gamification practices have achieved in 
medical treatment, nor their effectiveness in providing practical solutions for autistic 
children and their parents. Instead of criticizing any specific game, this paper challenges 
the current singular approach of serious games in addressing the complex  life 
challenges of autistic children and seeks to enrich existing knowledge and practices . 
This preliminary framework has two major limitations . Firstly, due to a scarcity of 
relevant work, there is a lack of  empirical data or pilot studies to support its claims 
about the effectiveness of neurodiversity principles in game design. Secondly, it is 
challenging to implement all three  principles in one game . In highly inclusive 
environments, the level of social safety may decrease, which can cause children to feel 
uncomfortable even if the activities within  the game are designed to be affirming. 
Although previous sections have provided some actionable insights, more methods 
need to be discussed to better bala nce these three principles.  
5 Conclusio n 
By reviewing current practices in the digital game area and referring to extensive 
research on autistic children, this paper highlights a disconnect between autistic 
children's need to safely and confidently socialize with their peers in the digital world 
and the existing solutions. To fill this gap, t he author advises serious game designers to 
shift their focus from "teaching autistic children  social skills" to "facilitating  
neurodiverse  social interactions"  with three main principles: inclusiveness, affir mation, 
and safety . This preliminary work intends to spark ongoing discussions in further 
developing these guidelines  and enrich  the existing knowledge and practices . The 
neurodiversity approach in serious game design is like an open door; a path will only 
be forged when more people pass through it.  
 Inclusive, Affirming , and Safe  Games for Autistic Socialization  7 
Acknowledgments.  The author would like to thank Boyang Wu and Katryna Starks for their 
valuable assistance in refining the language and improving the clarity of this paper . 
References  
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: CDC releases new data on autism prevalence 
in the US, https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2023/p0323 -autism.html, last accessed 
2024/05/22.  
2. Paulus, F.W., Sander, C.S., Nitze, M.,  Kramatschek -Pfahler, A.R.,  Voran, A., von  Gontard, 
A.: Gaming disorder and computer -mediated communication in children and adolescents 
with autism spectrum disorder.  Zeitschrift  für Kinder - 
und Jugendpsychiatrie  und Psychotherapie  48(2), 113 –122 (2020) . 
https://doi.org/10.1024/1422 -4917/a000674  
3. Simpson, K., Keen, D., Adams, D., Alston -Knox, C., Roberts, J.: Participation of children 
on the autism spectrum in home, school, and community. Child: Care, Health and 
Development 44(1), 99 -107 (2018) . https://doi.org/10.1111/cch.12483  
4. Eversole, M., Collins, D.M., Karmarkar, A., Colton, L., Quinn, J.P.,  Karsbaek, R., Hilton, 
C.L.: Leisure activity enjoyment of children with  autism spectrum disorders. Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders 46(1), 10 -20 (2016) . https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s10803 -
015-2529 -z 
5. Ghanouni, P.,  Jarus, T., Zwicker, J.G.,  Lucyshyn, J., Chauhan, S., Moir, C.: Perceived 
Barriers and Existing Challenges in Participation of Children with Autism Spectrum 
Disorders: 'He Did Not Understand and No One Else Seemed to Understand Him'. Journal 
of Autism and Developmental Disorders 49( 8), 3136 -3145 (2019 ). 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803 -019-04036 -7 
6. Aherne, D.: The Pocket Guide to Neurodiversity. Jessica Kingsley Publishers (2023)  
7. Bauminger, N.,  Kasari, C.: Loneliness and friendship in high -functioning children 
with autism. Child Development 71(2), 447 -456 (2000) . https://doi.org/10.1111/1467 -
8624.00156  
8. Humphrey, N., Symes, W.: Perceptions of social support and experience of bullying among 
pupils with autistic spectrum disorders in mainstream secondary schools. European Journal 
of Special Needs Education 25, 77 -91 (2010) . https://doi.org/10.1080/08856250903450855  
9. Ringland, K.E.: A Place to Play: The (Dis)Abled Embodied Experience for Autistic Children 
in Online Spaces. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI 2019), pp. 1 –12. ACM, New York (2019) . 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300518  
10. Nemours KidsHealth: What Is Cyberbullying? 
https://kidshealth.org/en/teens/cyberbullying.html , last accessed 2024/05/22.  
11. City of Annapolis: Facts About Cyberbullying. https://www.annapolis.gov/908/Facts -
About -Cyberbullying , last accessed 2024/05/22.  
12. Macmillan, K., Berg, T., Just, M., Stewart, M.E.: Are autistic children more vulnerable 
online? Relating autism to online safety, child wellbeing and parental risk management. In: 
Proceedings of the 2020 ACM International Conference on Interaction Design and Children 
(IDC '20), pp. 1 –10. ACM, New York (2020).  https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3419249.3420160  
13. Kellidou, M.,  Andreadis, D., Antoniou, P.: A review of digital games for children with 
autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Advances in Neurodevelopmental Disorders 4, 63 -70 
(2020) . https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3439231.3439270  
8  Y. Xiao  
14. Carneiro, T., Carvalho, A., Frota, S., Filipe, M.G.: Serious Games for Developing Social 
Skills in Children and Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Review. 
Healthcare  12(508), (2024)  https://doi.org/ 10.3390/healthcare12050508  
15. Atherton, G., Cross, L.: The Use of Analog and Digital Games for Autism Interventions. 
Frontiers in Psychology 12, 669734 (2021). https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.669734  
16. Murdock, L.C., Ganz, J., Crittendon, J.: Use of an iPad Play Story to Increase Play Dialogue 
of Preschoolers with Autism Spectrum Disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental 
Disorders 43(9), 2174 –2189 (2013).  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803 -013-1770 -6 
17. Youtube: Ted’s Ice Cream Adventures -WhizKid Games, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Had5Tmy0xYw , last accessed 2024/05/22.  
18. Youtube: Robbie the Robot gameplay, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BHBKGSui64I , 
last accessed 2024/05/22.  
19. TeachTown  Social Skills.  TeachTown. 
Available:  https://web.teachtown.com/solutions/teachtown -social -skills/ , last accessed , 
2024/05/22.  
20. American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 
5th edn. American Psychiatric Association, Arlington, VA (2013)  
21. Sharma, S., Gonda, X.,  Tarazi, F.: Autism Spectrum Disorder: Classification, diagnosis and 
therapy. Pharmacology & Therapeutics 190, 91 -104 (2018)  
22. Vismara, L., Rogers, S.: Behavioral treatments in autism spectrum disorder: what do we 
know? Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 6, 447 -468 (2010)  
23. McGill, O., Robinson, A.: 'Recalling hidden harms': Autistic experiences of childhood 
applied  behavioural  analysis (ABA). Advances in Autism 7(4), Article 4 (2021)  
24. Freitas, B.G.: Questioning Normativity: Exploring the Experiences of Autistic Adults Who 
Have Undergone Applied  Behavioural  Analysis (ABA). M.S. thesis, Toronto Metropolitan 
University, Toronto, Canada (2020)  
25. Cassidy, S.A., Gould, K., Townsend, E., Pelton, M., Robertson, A.E., Rodgers, J.: Is 
camouflaging autistic traits associated with suicidal thoughts and  behaviours? Expanding 
the interpersonal psychological theory of suicide in an undergraduate student sample. 
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 50(10), 3638 -3648 (2020)  
26. Jones, D.: Friendship satisfaction and gender: An examination of sex differences in 
contributors to friendship satisfaction. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 8, 167 –
185 (1991).  
27. de Schipper, E., Mahdi, S., de Vries, P., et al.: Functioning and disability in autism spectrum 
disorder: a worldwide survey of experts. Autism Research 9(9), 959 -969 (2016)  
28. Dwyer, P.: The Neurodiversity Approach(es): What Are They and What Do They Mean for 
Researchers? Human Development 66, 73 -92 (2022)  
29. Singer, J.: What does NeuroDiversity mean? NeuroDiversity 2.0. 
https://neurodiversity2.blogspot.com/p/what.html , last accessed 2024/05/28.  
30. Chapman, R.: Defining neurodiversity for research and practice. In: Roqvist, H.B., Chown, 
N., Stenning, A. (eds.) Neurodiversity Studies: A New Critical Paradigm, pp. 218 –220. 
Routledge (2020).  
31. Sturm, D., Kholodovsky, M., Arab, R., Smith, D.S., Asanov, P., Gillespie -Lynch, K.: 
Participatory design of a hybrid Kinect game to promote collaboration between autistic 
players and their peers. International Journal of Human –Computer Interaction 35(8), 7 06–
723 (2019).  
32. Battocchi, A.,  Pianesi, F.,  Tomasini, D.,  Zancanaro, M., Esposito, G., Venuti, P., 
Ben Sasson, A., Gal, E., Weiss, P.L.: Collaborative Puzzle Game: a Tabletop Interactive 
Game for Fostering Collaboration in Children with Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD). In: 
 Inclusive, Affirming , and Safe  Games for Autistic Socialization  9 
Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Interactive Tabletops and Surfaces, 
pp. 197 -204 (2009)  
33. Microsoft: Minecraft for Windows. Available:  https://www.microsoft.com/en -
ms/p/minecraft -for-windows/9nblggh2jhxj?activetab=pivot:overviewtab , last accessed , 
2024/05/22.  
34. Youtube: Trolling The Angriest Kid Ever On Minecraft, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Kw9ZGZqSpyU , last accessed , 2024/05/22.  
35. Youtube: Trolling a Little Kid in Minecraft, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G_CpPYSNkt8 , last accessed , 2024/05/22.  
36. ACAMH: Minecraft and Young People with Autism, 
https://www.acamh.org/blog/minecraft -young -people -autism/ , last accessed 2024/05/22.  
37. Wikipedia: Autcraft, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autcraft, last accessed 2024/05/22.  
38. Autcraft: Home. Available at https://www.autcraft.com/, last accessed 2024/07/20.  
39. Cambridge Dictionary: Inclusiveness. Available at 
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/inclusiveness, last accessed 
2024/07/20.  
40. Dallman , A.R., Williams, K.L., Villa, L.: Neurodiversity -affirming practices are a moral 
imperative for occupational therapy. Open J. Occupat. Ther. 10, 1 –9 (2022). 
https://doi.org/10.15453/2168 -6408.1937  
