in Education Through Playful and Game‑Based Learning
Stefan E. Huber1 · Kristian Kiili2 · Steve Nebel3 · Richard M. Ryan4,5 ·
Michael Sailer6 · Manuel Ninaus1,7
Accepted: 9 February 2024 / Published online: 27 February 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
This perspective piece explores the transformative potential and associated challenges of large language models (LLMs) in education and how those challenges
might be addressed utilizing playful and game-based learning. While providing
many opportunities, the stochastic elements incorporated in how present LLMs process text, requires domain expertise for a critical evaluation and responsible use of
the generated output. Yet, due to their low opportunity cost, LLMs in education may
pose some risk of over-reliance, potentially and unintendedly limiting the development of such expertise. Education is thus faced with the challenge of preserving
reliable expertise development while not losing out on emergent opportunities. To
address this challenge, we first propose a playful approach focusing on skill practice and human judgment. Drawing from game-based learning research, we then go
beyond this playful account by reflecting on the potential of well-designed games
to foster a willingness to practice, and thus nurturing domain-specific expertise. We
finally give some perspective on how a new pedagogy of learning with AI might
utilize LLMs for learning by generating games and gamifying learning materials,
leveraging the full potential of human-AI interaction in education.
Keywords Large language models · Generative artificial intelligence · Education ·
Playful learning · Gamification · Game-based learning
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) and their recently increased accessibility via chatbots like ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023), Bard (Google, 2023), or Bing Chat (Microsoft,
2023) provide both new opportunities and challenges for education. On the one
hand, they legitimately promise effective ways to assist with many tasks involved in
both teaching and learning (Bernabei et al., 2023; Kohnke et al., 2023), to provide
scalable, personalized learning material (Abd-alrazaq et al., 2023; Sallam, 2023),
Extended author information available on the last page of the article1 3Educational Psychology Review (2024) 36:25 Page 11 of 20 25
On a socio-cultural dimension (Fernández-Manjón et al., 2015), an issue is social
rejection of games, which may be reduced by improving society’s understanding of
games as another form of cultural good, and informing stakeholders (students, educators, and parents) about the social potential and positive effects of video games
(Granic et al., 2014) and their usefulness in education (Bourgonjon et al., 2010). At
the same time, violence, sexism, and discrimination are advised to be avoided in the
design of educational games (Fernández-Manjón et al., 2015).
Along an educational dimension, limited accessibility to educational games can
prevent their further adoption in education (Fernández-Manjón et al., 2015). Whereas
creating and maintaining user manuals and best practice guides are ways to facilitate
accessibility (Fernández-Manjón et al., 2015), both require further structural support.
The latter can be provided by simultaneous support and creation of communities of
practice (Wenger, 1998) allowing participation in development processes (MorenoGer et al., 2008) and knowledge production and transfer between educators, developers, and researchers (Fernández-Manjón et al., 2015; Hébert et al., 2021).
Along a technological dimension, limited accessibility to technology is an issue
(Hébert et al., 2021). Lowering development costs and developing environments that
allow educators some game development without requiring substantial programming skills and specific game development expertise are regarded as necessary steps
to address this issue (Fernández-Manjón et al., 2015).
LLMs as an Opportunity for Harnessing the Potential of Games Within Education
In this context, LLMs or more generally generative AI tools have the potential to
transform game-based learning practices and—again similarly to the use of computers in Papert’s class (1980)—could even become once more part of their own remedy regarding the challenge they pose for education. This, however, warrants a new
pedagogy of learning with artificial intelligence.
In particular, we identified two use scenarios in which generative AI tools can
boost the use of games in educational settings. First, generative AI tools provide new
ways to implement making games for learning approaches (Kafai & Burke, 2015), in
which students learn educational content by designing and making games. Second,
teachers and educators can utilize AI tools to gamify their learning materials or even
create fully-fledged learning games for their students. In the following, we consider
how LLMs can be utilized in these scenarios.
Learning by Generating Games
Making games for learning is another prime example of a constructionist learning
activity (Kafai & Burke, 2015) similar to Papert’s (1980) early use of computers in
the classroom discussed above. Kafai and Burke (2015) argue that we are witnessing
a paradigmatic shift toward constructionist gaming, in which students design games
for learning instead of just consuming games created by professional developers.Educational Psychology Review (2024) 36:251 325 Page 12 of 20
We believe that generative AI tools will further accelerate this shift. LLMs have
the potential to make game creation more accessible for novices in a similar way as
block-based visual programming environments like Scratch (Resnick et al., 2009)
lowered the demands to program interactive stories and animations in educational
settings. The pedagogical idea behind learning by generating games relies mostly
on the assumption that game-making activities help students reformulate their
understanding of the subject matter (educational content) and express their personal
understanding and ideas about the subject (Kafai, 2006). In addition, generating
games using AI’s technical backup can be open and creative, allowing for experiences of autonomy and competence essential to sustained interest and intrinsic motivation (Ryan & Rigby, 2020). As the technicalities of programming can be largely
outsourced to LLMs, students can focus more on the topic and game design aspects.
A recent study indicates that game-designing activities can be even more beneficial, especially for the long-term retention of knowledge, than learning by playing
games (Chen & Liu, 2023). Furthermore, Resnick et al., (2009) have emphasized
that digital fluency requires more than just interacting with media; it requires an
ability to collaboratively design, create, and invent with media. Similar abilities are
needed when creating games with the help of LLMs and seem now more important
than ever. However, making games with LLMs also imposes unique requirements
for students as well as for teachers who are orchestrating the game-making activities.
We coined the term prompting pedagogy to capture fundamental pedagogical practices involved in generating games or other digital outputs with the help of
LLMs going beyond prompt engineering as discussed above and constituting one
aspect of a new pedagogy of learning with AI. While prompt engineering will be a
crucial competence for harnessing the potential of AI in education (Eager & Brunton, 2023), we also want to emphasize that the ability to critically evaluate generated outputs and its facilitation by existing (domain) expertise are equally important
(Dwivedi et al., 2023; Krügel et al., 2023). This critical evaluation informs the crafting of prompts leading to meaningful and constructive dialogue with LLMs. Such
cumulative and continuous dialog is crucial when using LLMs in complex tasks
like game-making. Moreover, using LLMs in such a reflective and critical manner
enhances critical thinking and problem-based learning (Bernabei et al., 2023; Sallam, 2023; Shue et al., 2023).
It is evident that effective prompting is challenging, and students need support
to develop adequate prompting skills to generate games with LLMs. Prompting
pedagogy for game-making also involves the preparation of support materials (e.g.,
prompting templates for different purposes) and sequencing the prompting activities
to specific phases (e.g., idea generation, core design, prototyping, and assessment).
Even though the use of LLMs plays a crucial role in the suggested learning by
generating games approach, the design and production activities need to be integrated into a meaningful teaching process. For example, the creative thinking
spiral process (imagine, create, play, share, reflect, imagine, and so forth) can be
adapted to the learning by generating games approach (Resnick, 2009). According
to Resnick (2009, p. 1), in this process, “people imagine what they want to do, create a project based on their ideas, play with their creations, share their ideas and
creations with others, and reflect on their experiences—all of which leads them to1 3Educational Psychology Review (2024) 36:25 Page 13 of 20 25
imagine new ideas and new projects.” This thus provides a way to emphasize playtesting with peers (sharing and testing game prototypes and games) as well as reflective discussion sessions about prompting and game design strategies in LLMs-based
game-making projects.
Overall, learning by generating games promotes a creative, experimental, playful,
and inclusive learning culture that aims to support the learning of academic content
while preparing students for utilizing generative AI tools effectively and creatively
in different contexts. As teachers have a significant role in this approach, a starting
point for them may be to generate at least one learning game with an LLM before
applying the learning approach in their teaching. Such first-hand experience can
facilitate perceiving the affordances that LLMs provide, preparing support materials
for students, and planning the workflow of activities.
The use of generative AI for developing learning games may also help to decrease
the barriers to the creation of low-budget game productions and educational games.
One problem with educational games is that we have become more and more accustomed to big-budget releases. Many educational games seem degraded by comparison (e.g., poor graphics and mechanics) and are thus perceived as boring or unappealing. A reasonable utilization of LLMs for game development could eventually
help to close this gap. Moreover, since the activities are learner generated, they may
well engender a different kind of interest and sense of ownership than studio produced educational outputs.
Gamifying Learning Materials
Generative AI provides many low-threshold possibilities for educators to gamify
their teaching or to generate learning games for teaching. That is, LLMs and generative AI might establish themselves as a useful tool for developing (educational)
games, for instance, by supporting the generation of artwork, code, or game levels
(Nasir & Togelius, 2023; Todd et al., 2023). LLMs can further assist educators in
the analysis, design, evaluation, and development phases of game creation projects,
allowing, for instance, the adaption of popular board games such as Monopoly for
specific learning purposes (Gatti Junior et al., 2023).
It may eventually not matter whether the game makers are students or educators;
the generation of games with LLMs requires a playful, experimental, and iterative
style of engagement in which game makers continually reassess their goals, explore
new solutions, and imagine new possibilities based on the generated outputs and
dialogue with LLMs. Resnick and Rosenbaum (Resnick & Rosenbaum, 2013) called
such a bottom-up approach “tinkering.” As highlighted above, one of the key skills
of the successful generation of games with LLMs is prompting and critical evaluation of generated outputs, which requires expertise such tinkering might enhance.
As game development is usually a highly interdisciplinary process requiring
expertise in various areas, LLMs might be used to complement individuals’ skills
in a particular area. For instance, it might allow an educator with expertise in
the pedagogical approach for a given problem and an idea for the game design
to implement a working prototype of an educational game, which would have
been significantly more difficult for the educator without using generative AIEducational Psychology Review (2024) 36:251 325 Page 14 of 20
technologies. Furthermore, as game design is a very complex activity, it is important to break complex prompts into a series of small, specific steps and phases,
starting from the idea generation and identification of instructional approaches
and core game mechanics. For example, chain-of-thought prompting (generating
intermediate outputs) or role prompting (giving the LLM, e.g., the specific role of
an instructional designer or target group player) can increase the model’s contextual tenability and enhance the quality of outputs.
Conclusions and General Remarks
On balance, implementing insights from game-based learning in educational contexts is far from a straightforward task. However, game-based learning research
has revealed that well-designed games indeed address, challenge, and promote
players holistically, incorporating all cognitive (Mayer, 2020), affective (Loderer
et al., 2020), motivational (Ryan & Rigby, 2020), and sociocultural (Steinkuehler
& Tsaasan, 2020) aspects of the human condition. Applications of game-based
learning in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (Klopfer & Thompson, 2020), or the development of educational games for critical thinking (Butcher
et al., 2017) or social problem-solving (Ang et al., 2017) indicate at least the
potential games may have for fostering deep engagement with the learning material and continuous practice of expertise. Utilizing LLMs for learning by generating games and purposefully gamifying learning materials may allow educators to
fully harness the potential of games toward a new pedagogy of learning with AI.
The potential of playful and game-based learning we see for education is
strongly related to games’ motivational and engaging power, that “in play, the aim
is play itself” (Flanagan, 2009). Even if the activities associated with the playful
engagement encountered in games could be delegated to AI support, who would
want this—because in this context, it would be outsourcing the fun and intrinsic
satisfactions of play. That would be like delegating joy to a robot. Even if we
could, why should we want that?
The notion of (good) practice has since Aristotle (2020) involved the aspect of
bearing its meaning in itself, a quality which practice has, according to Rousseau
and Schiller (Greipl et al., 2020), in common with play. It seems as if the advent
of AI challenges us as educators to remember and revive research and its teaching, as such practice calls for the creation and cultivation of playful spaces within
education. While this perspective is certainly not about advocating that we redesign each class into a game promising enjoyment or entertainment, we think that
game-based learning could be especially valuable in taking advantage of the educational capabilities of AI, which themselves require capable human partnership.
Funding Open access funding provided by University of Graz. The authors acknowledge the financial
support of the University of Graz. Kristian Kiili was supported by the Strategic Research Council (SRC)
established within the Research Council of Finland [Grants: 335625, 358250].1 3Educational Psychology Review (2024) 36:25 Page 15 of 20 25
Data Availability Not applicable to this article as no datasets were generated or analysed during the current study.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence,