Using Chatbots to teach English  as a foreign language:  A systematic literature review from 2010 to 2023 Xinran Xu  Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education Central China Normal University  Wuhan, China  xuxinran@mail.ccnu.edu.cn Yuxuan Wang  Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education Central China Normal University  Wuhan, China 2033824276@qq.com Zeyue Shang  Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education Central China Normal University  Wuhan, China 2109079998@qq.com Ling Jiang Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education Central China Normal University  Wuhan, China ljiangcn@mail.ccnu.edu.cn  Heng Luo Faculty of Artificial Intelligence in Education Central China Normal University  Wuhan, China luoheng@mail.ccnu.edu.cnAbstract—This  study  conducts  a  systematic  review  of  the research on the utilization of chatbots for supporting English as a  Foreign  Language  (EFL)  instruction  in  K-12  and  higher education settings from 2010 to 2023. The study adheres to the PRISMA  methodology  guidelines  and  searches  open  access empirical studies in three renowned databases: Web of Science, Scopus,  and  IEEE  Xplore.  Ultimately,  a total  of 42  empirical studies  are  selected  as  the  research  sample  library  for  this comprehensive  review.  The  analysis  focuses  on  four interconnected  aspects  of  chatbot-supported  EFL  teaching: instructional  context,  instructional  design,  technical  features, and  application  effects.  The  findings  unveil  current  research trends and shed light on the teaching environment surrounding chatbots  in  EFL  instruction.  Furthermore,  this  review highlights  the  technological  affordances  offered  by  chatbots while  reporting  both  their  effects  and  limitations  based  on existing  studies.  Finally,  new  avenues  for  future  research  in chatbot-based EFL instruction are proposed. Keywords—Chatbots,  ChatGPT,  EFL,  second  language learning, teaching I. INTRODUCTIONChatbots refer to a dialog system replicating written and/or verbal communication with  human  users, typically over  the Internet. The dialogue system can be text-based or task-based and  respond  with  speech,  graphics,  virtual  gestures,  or physically assisted tactual gestures[1]. The latest evolution of chatbots, often referred to as “intelligent personal assistants” (IPA),  can  not  only  understand  free-flowing  conversation through  use  of  sophisticated  language  models,  but  even automate relevant tasks.  Classification according to chatbot  mode, there  are  two types  of  chatbots:  text-based  chatbots  and  voice-enabled chatbots[2].  With  the  launch  of  OpenAI’s  ChatGPT  in November  2022,  the  classification  of  chatbots  has  a  new dimension. Classification from the perspective of intelligence, chatbots can be divided into non-generative chatbots (such as Google Assistant) and generative chatbots (such as ChatGPT). English  has  become  the  most  widely  spoken  language globally, with approximately 1.5 billion people speaking it as a  first,  second,  or  foreign  language.  Therefore,  learning English  is  essential  for  students  to  adapt  to  global development.  Many  empirical  studies  have  confirmed  the effectiveness  of  AI  Chatbots  in  EFL  fields.  In  particular, chatbots have the ability to not only enhance English learners' command  of  linguistic  knowledge,  including  grammar  and vocabulary,  but  also  improve  their  practical English  skills, including oral communication[3], listening[4], reading[5], and argumentative writing[6]. Studies have shown that the use of chatbot-driven  e-classes  increased  students'  motivation, improved  their  English  language  skills  in  reading  and language  use,  and  increased  their  engagement  in  second language  e-classes[7].  The  chatbots  facilitated  the  Socratic Inquiry method in EFL group discussions, increasing learners’ critical thinking, satisfaction, and number of conversations[1]. The  mobility,  convenience,  interactivity,  versatility  and familiarity  of  smartphone  IPA  allows  them  to  practice speaking English anytime, anywhere and  at  their own pace. IPA  acts  as  a  supportive  and  patient  learning  partner, increasing learner engagement and confidence[8]. IPA-based interaction provided a less threatening environment, in which learners displayed higher  levels  of  engagement, motivation, confidence,  and,  in  turn,  their  willingness  to communicate(WTC) in the target  language[9].However, the suitability of AI chatbots across different English proficiency levels  is  debated.      While  some  argue  chatbots  are  less effective for beginners due to their design for native speaker interaction  [10],  others  have  found  benefits  for  all  levels, showcasing  significant  oral  English  improvement  across beginner to advanced learners [11]. Few  reviews  exist  on  chatbots  for  foreign  language teaching,  but  they  highlight  several  key  points.  Existing reviews  primarily  focuses  on  chatbots'  effectiveness, motivation,  learning  satisfaction,  frequency  of  use,  and evaluation[12].  However,  research  on  the  application  of chatbots  in  foreign  language  education,  particularly  in  the context of English as a foreign language, is currently limited. This is especially true in the areas of emotional computing and teaching ethics[13]. Furthermore, future research should focus on technical and pedagogical challenge[14, 15]. The reviews indicate that the use of chatbots in foreign language teaching 972024 International Symposium on Educational Technology (ISET)DOI 10.1109/ISET61814.2024.000282024 International Symposium on Educational Technology (ISET) | 979-8-3503-6141-4/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISET61814.2024.00028979-8-3503-6141-4/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEEAuthorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on December 08,2024 at 12:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
is still in its early stages and requires more empirical research to explore its potential and challenges. It is worth noting that there are relatively few reviews of emerging chatbots, such as  ChatGPT,  compared to existing ones.  The  efficacy  of  ChatGPT  in  supporting  students  to complete  language  tasks  has  not  been  fully  elucidated[2]. Therefore, a systematic review of the application of chatbots, including ChatGPT, in foreign language teaching is  urgently needed  to  evaluate  and  understand  their  actual  effects  in different  teaching  environments.  This  will  help  to  better explore  the  application  of  chatbots  in  foreign  language teaching. The emergence of ChatGPT represents a significant technological  advancement  that  has  the  potential  to  bring about  fundamental  changes  in  teaching  methods  and outcomes.  This  systematic  review  aims  to  enhance  our understanding of  the role  of this technology in  teaching and may  provide  new  perspectives  and  methods  for  foreign language instruction. To  address  this  research  gap,  this  study  systematically analyzed 14 years (2010-2023) of literature on Chatbot-based instruction  in  K-12  and  higher  education  settings.  The instructional context, instructional design, technical features, and  instructional  outcomes  were  reviewed.  The  following questions guided the review: 1.  Which  teaching  environments  in  K-12  and  higher education  have  applied  Chatbot  to  facilitate  teaching  and learning, and how? 2.  What  pedagogical  and  design  elements  are  used  to support Chatbot-based instruction? 3. What are the technical features of Chatbot? II. METHOD A. Research Methods This  study  adopted  the  method  of  systematic  review  to screen, code and analyze the articles published from January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2023, to explore the application of Chatbot  in  foreign  language  teaching  and  learning.  The research  process  followed  the  general  process  used  in  the international  development  of  systematic  literature  review, namely the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and  Meta-Analyses  (PRISMA)  process,  including:  (1) literature retrieval (Identification); (2) screening and inclusion (Inclusion); (3) coding and analysis (Analysis). B. Initial Literature Search In terms of literature retrieval, due to the relatively small literature  on  Chatbot,  this  study  used  three  databases  for retrieval,  which  are  Web  of  Science,  Scopus,  and  IEEE Xplore.  Web  of  Science  is  a  large-scale  comprehensive, multidisciplinary,  and  core  journal  citation  index  database. Users can quickly retrieve  the  core literature in  the  field  of educational technology and understand the research status and development trends in this field. At the same time, the citation tracking function of the database can help users track the latest research results in related fields, which is conducive to the in-depth development of academic research. As the largest peer-reviewed literature abstract and citation database, Scopus has a  large  number  of  literatures,  covering  journals  and patent literature in various disciplines, which can meet the needs of our study. As the main database in the field of electronics and electrical engineering, IEEE Xplore is particularly suitable for searching  technology-related  education  research.  The literature included in this database is of high quality, most of which have been peer-reviewed and have a certain academic authority. In summary, the above databases cover a wide range of literature and are internationally recognized, so this study uses these three databases to retrieve literature. Four  search  strings are used for literature  retrieval. The first string includes "Chatbot* OR ChatGPT OR IPA" and the full name of IPA "intelligent personal assistants". The second string is EFL OR "English as Foreign Language" OR "L2" OR ESL  OR  "second  language",  which  is  used  to  limit  the teaching subjects  to English as  a foreign language teaching. The third string proposes the requirement of K-16, which is specifically explained as primary OR elementary OR middle OR  junior  OR  high  OR  senior OR "K-12" OR college OR university  OR  "higher  education".  The  last  search  string  is education OR school OR teach* OR learn*, which is used to screen out articles outside of teaching. C. Manual Screening At this  stage, we manually filtered the articles according to the following criteria: (1) The study must involve a chatbot or ChatGPT or IPA (intelligent personal assistant). VR, AR, MR were excluded. (2) Grade level was K-16. The contexts of special  education  and  professional  development  were removed. (3) The study must involve the learning or teaching of English as a foreign language or second language. (4) The study  must  be  empirical  studies  (experimental,  qualitative, quantitative,  mixed  methods  and  design-based  studies). Finally, 128 articles were excluded. In addition, the snowball technique, also known as citation chain, was also used in this stage to avoid  missing any  important literature.  The manual screening process is shown in Fig. 1. After manual screening, a total of 42 articles were selected into the main database for the analysis and coding in the next stage. D. Analyzing the Codes After completing the main  database, we investigated the content  of  the  selected  articles  and  collected  detailed information in the following five categories: article metadata, Chatbot-based  Teaching  Background,  Teaching  Design Features, Technology Availability, and Experimental Results. Table 1 illustrates the coding scheme of this study and lists the codes and brief descriptions  for each  category. As shown in Table  1,  metadata  provides  key  information  such  as  the publication  year  and  type  of  articles,  and  can  be  easily recorded, selected, and  classified.  The other four categories correspond to  the four research  questions. The  context code indicates  the  application  scenarios  of  Chatbot  in  English teaching. The design code specifies the teaching functions of Chatbot  as  well  as  the  teaching  method  and  scaffolding design. The technology code describes the technical features of  Chatbot  intervention  in  terms  of  chatbot  brand,  input method, generative, intelligent, and  humanoid. The research code  mainly  focuses  on  empirical  results,  such  as  learning outcomes, data sources, and effect size of Chatbot in foreign language teaching.  III. RESULTS A. Instructional Contexts Fig.  2  shows  the  number  of  published  Chatbot-based empirical studies on EFL teaching and learning between 2010 and 2023. As can be seen from Fig. 2, the number of empirical studies  has  increased  significantly  from  2019,  reaching  the highest number in 2023, which is closely related to the release 98Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on December 08,2024 at 12:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
of ChatGPT, a large language model, in November 2022. This represents a huge step forward in the chatbot space, and Fig. 2 also shows that the overall trend has increased over the past 10 years. Based on the trends in Fig. 2 and combined with the fact  that  ChatGPT  will  release  version  4.0  in  March  2023, there  will  be  more  and  more  empirical  research  on  the teaching application of chatbots. Of the 42 empirical studies systematically  reviewed  in  this  paper,  all  identified  the countries and regions in which  the  studies were conducted, 95.2% were located in Asia (40) and the remaining two were located  in  North  America  and  Europe.  Specifically,  South Korea conducted the highest number of empirical studies (13), followed by Taiwan (7) and China (6). TABLE I.  LISTS OF CODES FOR THE ANALYSIS OF SELECTED ARTICLES. Category  Code  Description Metadata Title  Full title of the study Authors  Complete list of author names Year  Publication year Source  Information about the journal/book/URL Empirical Type  Experimental/quantitative/qualitative/mixed/design-based research Context Location  Country or region where the study was conducted Grade level  Elementary/middle/high school/college/mixed Foreign language proficiency  High/medium/low Environment  In-class/out-of-class/both Design Instructional function Increase interest in learning/willingness to communicate/personalized instruction/reduce foreign language anxiety/oral communication/listening practice/writing practice/vocabulary and grammar practice/intelligent feedback and assessment/support for "24/7" assisted learning Pedagogy Self-study/teacher-guided/collaborative/flipped classroom/gamed-based learning Learning objective Speaking/listening/vocabulary/grammar/writing/reading Scaffolding  No scaffolding/manuals/chatbot-based/teacher-guided/both Technology Brand Amazon Alexa/Echo/Google Assistant/ChatGPT/Mondly/Cleverbot/Replika/Andy/CSIEC/Mitsuku/Indigo/Duolingo/Memrise/chatbots developed by researchers Input  Text-based chatbot/voice-based chatbot/virtual image-based chatbot Generative  Generative artificial intelligence/non-generative Intelligence  Understandability/session continuity/language appropriateness Human character  No character/virtual image character/real robot Effect Data collection  Questionnaire/interviews/tests Performance  Enhance/non-significant Although the issue of AI language education has received considerable attention, most research in the field of AI chatbot enhanced  language  education  is  focused  only  on  higher education[15].  In  the  42  empirical  studies  we  counted,  the application of chatbot in foreign language teaching in higher education is more extensive than that in K-12 education, with 70% of the studies occurring in the context of higher education and only 30% involving K-12 teaching. The foreign language proficiency of the participants ranges from low to high, which is usually assessed by standardized tests[8] or by providing the participants' scores  on the speaking  part of TOEIC,  TOEFL iBT,  IELTS  or  GEPT[4].  Most  participants  are  at  an intermediate  level.  In  addition,  we  also  counted  the environment  in  which  teaching  took  place,  53%  of  chatbot teaching activities took place in the classroom, 29% took place outside  the  classroom,  and  18%  were  a  combination  of  in-class and out-of-class. One of the biggest challenges for EFL students to learn English is the lack of practice environment. Researchers  used  chatbots  for  activities  inside  and  outside class,  trying  to  increase  classroom  practice  time  through flipped classroom[17].  Fig. 1. PRISMA flow diagram for study identification and selection based on the guidelines proposed by Page et al[16].  Fig. 2. The  number  of  empirical Chatbot studies in  EFL  that have been published in K-12 and higher education between 2010 and 2023. B. Instructional Design 1) Learning objective and Instructional function. Chatbots, as tools of artificial intelligence, are utilized in language  education to enhance various skills  like  speaking, reading, listening, writing [18],vocabulary [19] and grammar [20]. As shown in Fig. 3, speaking (45%) is the primary focus in using chatbots for English language teaching, followed by listening (14%),  vocabulary (13%), grammar (12%), writing (11%), and reading (5%). Chatbots  are  particularly  effective  for  speaking practice [11].  They  provide  interactive  conversational  experiences  99Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on December 08,2024 at 12:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[21], which have been shown to improve learners' oral skills, comparable to interacting with native speakers [22]. However, challenges  exist  for  lower-level  learners,  especially  in pronunciation  [4].  In  vocabulary  learning,  chatbots  have significantly  helped  in  acquisition  and  provided  diagnostic [23].  For  grammar,  a  study  with  Korean  undergraduates showed significant improvements in both chatbot and human interaction groups,  with the  chatbot group showing a  higher rate of improvement [20]. In terms of argumentative writing, chatbots  supports  students'  writing  by  supporting  the generation  of  ideas  and  triggering  the  integration  of refutations  [6].  In  contrast,  research  on  using  chatbots  for reading is limited, though they have been used to help teachers create  reading  materials  and  tests  [24].  This  research  gap provides a new starting point for future research.  Fig. 3. Learning objectives of EFL. Moreover, as shown in  Fig. 4,  in  addition to improving participants' foreign language skills, the study also confirmed other teaching functions of chatbots. For example,  47.6% of the studies believed that the use of chat robots to assist foreign language  learning  can  reduce  students'  anxiety.  Anxiety caused by speaking in a second language will make learners feel confused and further affect their oral English ability [25]. This  reduction  in  anxiety  is  attributed  to  the  instant  and multimodal feedback that chatbots provide [22]. Chatbots also help in attracting students' attention  and stimulating interest [26], although  this effect  may vary  and sometimes be short-lived due to novelty [3]. Yang et al. [27] found that chatbots provide  instant  feedback  to  language  learners,  promoting learners'  autonomy and self-correction.33.3%  of  the  studies also  proved  this  point.  Furthermore,  chatbots  enhance learners'  willingness  to  communicate  by  providing  a supportive  and  patient  learning  environment  [8],  available 24/7 for practice [28]. Overall, chatbots  serve multiple  educational functions  in language  learning,  primarily  enhancing  speaking  skills, reducing  anxiety,  and  fostering  learner  autonomy  and engagement.  However,  the  effectiveness  varies  across  skill levels and the novelty effect is a factor to consider.  Fig. 4. Chatbot's instructional functions in EFL. 2) Pedagogy and Scaffolding.   As  shown  in  Fig.  5,  in  the  chatbot-based  teaching environment, teacher-guided teaching and  student self-study are the most  popular teaching methods.  A blend  of  teacher-guided instruction and student self-directed study is prevalent. Studies indicate significant benefits when teacher  support is integrated, such as enhanced listening and speaking skills. For instance,  an  experiment  with university EFL learners using Google  Assistant  at  home  demonstrated  superior  oral development  in  students  who  received  teacher  guidance compared to those who did [29]. These teaching strategies are often  employed  together,  merging  teacher  guidance  with opportunities for self-exploration and peer interaction [9].  Fig. 5. The pedagogies used in chatbot-based EFL instruction. Furthermore,  incorporating  chatbots  into  flipped classroom models  shows promise in improving  EFL student efficiency  by  offloading  teacher  workload  and  providing flexible, anytime interaction with chatbots as practice partners [30]. This approach not only makes learning more engaging for  students  but  also  supports  their  independent  learning. Gamification in online language learning platforms, through chatbot-driven conversations, creates  immersive experiences that positively impact  learning outcomes[31].  Johnson et al. [32] found that chatbots enhanced  vocabulary through  word guessing  and  encouraged  writing  practice  by  combining gamification and narrative elements to engage students. C. Technology Features Our  analysis  of 42  studies, as illustrated by a statistical word  cloud  (Fig.  6),  highlights  the  frequent  use  of  major international chatbot brands like Google Assistant, ChatGPT, and Amazon Alexa.  Google Assistant, an intelligent personal assistant,  supports  language  learning  through  voice commands,  answering  queries,  and  offering  advice, commonly used on smartphones, tablets, and smart speakers.  ChatGPT,  created  by  OpenAI,  stands  out  for  its ability  to engage  in  dynamic  conversations  and  generate  content, including  summaries  and  draft  presentations,  with  its  latest version capable of producing high-quality academic articles.  Amazon's  Alexa,  launched  in  2014,  is  favored  for  its versatility and wide range of third-party applications.  Besides these well-known brands, the studies also incorporate custom-developed chatbots  and popular regional chatbots, including Replika,  Cleverbot,  and  Indigo,  demonstrating  the  diverse chatbot tools utilized in language learning research. Analysis  of  chatbot  interactions  in  language  learning research reveals a predominant use of speech input chatbots, constituting 70% of the cases, aligning with the emphasis on oral  communication skills.  Text input chatbots  also  play  a significant  role,  covering  30%  of  interactions,  catering  to writing and grammar objectives. Some studies opt for a hybrid approach,  combining  both  voice  and  text  inputs  to 100Authorized licensed use limited to: Zhejiang University. Downloaded on December 08,2024 at 12:13:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
accommodate  diverse  research  needs  and  experimental designs. Despite their nomenclature, most chatbots lack a physical or  visual  persona,  primarily  functioning  within  software interfaces without embodying real robots or avatars. However, a noteworthy exception exists in the form of a voice-driven AI chatbot  presented  as  a  smiling  female  teacher  avatar, enhancing  the  humanized  interaction  experience  [33]. Physical  robot  usage  in  these  studies  is  minimal,  mainly restricted to smart speakers like Amazon Echo. This scenario underscores  a  gap  in  the  utilization  of  more  tangible  or visually  interactive  chatbots,  suggesting  potential  areas  for future  research  to  explore  whether more lifelike bots could enrich  the  language  learning  experience  by  offering  more engaging  and  interactive  opportunities  for  practice  and engagement.  Fig. 6. Chatbot Brand-Related Word Cloud Map. IV. DISCUSSION Analysis of 42 empirical studies reveals three primary data collection  methods:  questionnaire  surveys,  interviews,  and tests, with some studies employing multiple methods to assess the  multifaceted  impact  of  chat  robots  on  foreign  language teaching.    An  example  is  Yuan  et  al.'s  [34]  study,  which combined  pre-tests,  post-tests,  and  surveys  to  evaluate  the effectiveness  of  chatbots  in  EFL  education  in  a  Chinese primary  school,  supplemented  by  interviews  for  deeper insights. Key  limitations  include  technical  issues encountered by over  half  of the  participants,  such  as  setup  difficulties  and sensitivity  to  noise;  challenges  in  understanding  non-native speakers' pronunciation and in comprehending their language expressions;  and  a  preference  for  human  interaction  over intelligent assistants, highlighting the limitations in replicating genuine interpersonal interactions [29]. V. CONCLUSION This  study  systematically  reviewed  the  experimental research on chatbots enabling foreign language teaching over the past 14 years. Based on the summary results of 42 selected articles,  this  paper  provides  a  preliminary  answer  to  three research questions:(1) The empirical research on the teaching application of chatbots presents a booming trend, mostly in the classroom, and  mostly in  higher education.(2) Chatbots  are used  in  the  teaching  of  oral  English  as  a  foreign  language, listening,  vocabulary,  grammar,  writing  and  reading,  and show a variety of teaching functions.(3) A variety of brands of chatbots are used in foreign language teaching, and users can interact with these chatbots  through voice  and text. Most  of the  chatbots  do  not  have  virtual  or  real  images,  but  only through the chat page for auxiliary teaching.  In the future, under the background of the new generation of  large  language  model  ChatGPT,  the  research  can  make more  horizontal  comparisons  between  different  chatbots  to explore whether the intelligence of chatbots has an impact on EFL  learning.  In  terms  of  teaching  situations,  we  should explore the auxiliary teaching of chatbots outside of class, so that students can learn anytime and anywhere. In addition, the application of chatbots in different levels of education should be further explored. In addition to continuing to study chatbots in oral  English teaching, the diverse uses of chatbots should be explored, and attention should be paid to whether chatbots have teaching potential  in reading and  writing. At the  same time, the impact of novelty effect should also be continued to be paid attention to. At the same time, in future experimental research, more research can be done on the influence of real robots or robots with virtual images on teaching, and technical performance  can  be  continuously  optimized  to  improve chatbots' comprehension abilities